There’s an old sportswriting axiom that states the best stories reside in the losing locker room. I’ve never bought that as an absolute, but for this week I am embracing the insufferable, the miserable, the worst of the worst. When I worked at Sports Illustrated, one of my titles was special projects editor, and part of that charter was to get the staff involved in projects across multiple sports. One of those projects was a series on the 25 Most Hated Teams in Sports History. That ended up spawning additional pieces, including the worst NBA teams our writers had covered during their careers. Since then, I’ve always wanted to do a similar project, and this week The Athletic will unveil essays from some terrific sports media people (including from some colleagues at The Athletic) on the worst team they’ve covered as a professional.Below, the list of insufferable teams and the person who covered (endured) it.NFL (Monday)
1990 Denver Broncos (Adam Schefter)
1994 Dallas Cowboys (Dale Hansen)
2000 & 2001 San Diego Chargers (Jim Trotter)
2003 New York Giants (Tara Sullivan)
2010 Denver Broncos (Lindsay Jones)
2012 New York Jets (Kimberley A. Martin)
2012 Philadelphia Eagles (Les Bowen)
2016 Jacksonville Jaguars (Ryan O’Halloran)
2017 Indianapolis Colts (Stephen Holder)
NHL (Tuesday)
2003-04 Pittsburgh Penguins (Trenni Kusnierek)
2005-06 St. Louis Blues (Jeremy Rutherford)
2007-08 Atlanta Thrashers (Craig Custance)
2009-10 Toronto Maple Leafs (James Mirtle)
2010-11 New York Islanders (Katie Strang)
2011-12 Columbus Blue Jackets (Aaron Portzline)
2013-14 Vancouver Canucks (Jason Botchford)
2014-15 Buffalo Sabres (John Vogl)
MLB (Wednesday)
1986 California Angels (Gene Wojciechowski)
1988 Baltimore Orioles (Richard Justice)
1993 New York Mets (Frank Isola)
1995 Oakland A’s (Pedro Gomez)
1998 Florida Marlins (David O’Brien)
2002 Chicago Cubs (Teddy Greenstein)
2012-16 New York Yankees (Marly Rivera)
2018 Kansas City Royals (Rustin Dodd)
NBA/WNBA (Thursday)
1992-93 Washington Bullets (David Aldridge)
2005-06 Portland Trail Blazers (John Canzano)
2005-06 New York Knicks (Howard Beck)
2007-08 Golden State Warriors (Tim Kawakami)
2008-09 Los Angeles Clippers (Lisa Dillman)
2010-11 Cleveland Cavaliers (Jason Lloyd)
2011 Tulsa Shock (Kelly Hines)
2013-14 Los Angeles Lakers (Dave McMenamin)
2014-15 Brooklyn Nets (Tim Bontemps)
2015-16 Philadelphia 76ers (Derek Bodner)
Colleges (Friday)
1994 Kentucky Football (Pat Forde)
1997 Maryland Football (Seth Emerson)
1999 Northwestern Basketball (Mark Lazerus)
2002 Stanford Football (Jon Wilner)
2002-03 Villanova Basketball (Dana O’Neil)
2008 Washington Football (Ted Miller)
2014 Michigan Football (Angelique Chengelis)
2015 Idaho Football (Michael Shawn-Dugar)
Let us know in the comments below if you have a particular team that stands out as the worst for you. And, please, enjoy the misery:Adam Schefter, ESPNThe 1990 Broncos had more arrests (too many to count) than wins (5). Eight players on the 1990 and ’91 Broncos were charged with violent crimes against women, ranging from rape to battery to assault. Seven of the eight Broncos, according to a Washington Post study from November 1994, made plea bargains and only two spent more than a week in jail. One player was acquitted. And there were lesser-known incidents as well. “A lot of the guys on that team were basically thugs,” former Broncos running back Reggie Rivers told the Post as he recalled his rookie season from 1991.Rivers’ recollection is spot on. Back then, I was spending my first season on an NFL beat. The Rocky Mountain News hired me in the summer of 1990, and one of my jobs was to pitch in on the Broncos’ beat, as a backup beat reporter. It was a quick indoctrination. There were constant calls from news editors, asking to track down details of the latest player being arrested for the latest transgression. And there were plenty of them. Those calls came early in the morning, late at night, at all hours of the day. Yet even back then, those offenses, regrettably, did not command the level of attention that they would today. But we covered them and covered them all.One that stood out from that season was left tackle Gerald Perry being limited to nine games in that 1990 season due to being suspended for his multiple off-the-field problems. Perry was a good left tackle, in charge of protecting John Elway’s blindside, but he also was arrested multiple times and, after serving nine days in jail in February 1989, served another 65 days in the summer of 1991 for sexual assault and violation of probation, largely from incidents that occurred during that 1990 season.That 1990 team had some great people to deal with —John Elway, Shannon Sharpe, Mark Jackson, Dave Widell, Karl Mecklenburg, Dennis Smith, to name some. But it had so many miscreants that covering the football team wasn’t all that different from being assigned the police beat. Not only were they bad guys, there were also bad players. This team had a three-game losing streak early in the season, then a six-game losing streak that started in November and lasted until mid-December. There are few things less enjoyable than walking into an NFL locker room day after day filled with players who haven’t won a game in weeks.Many of the veteran reporters from the Rocky Mountain News who covered that team grew sick of it quickly. Barely anyone wanted to continue doing it. It allowed me to be put on an NFL beat, and stay on an NFL beat, because nobody wanted to cover those bad news Broncos. Fortunately, I got stuck with them.Dale Hansen, WFAA-TV Dallas I think the worst team I’ve ever covered was the 1994 Cowboys. It was a good team, but not the Super Bowl team it was the previous two years. But it’s not the end result that made it the worst team for me —  it was the mess of a year we had to deal with.It started with the firing of head coach Jimmy Johnson and the replacing of him with former Oklahoma coach Barry Switzer. It was a ridiculous hire and it was the beginning of the end of the Cowboys return to glory.The Cowboys did win a Super Bowl the next year. But with Switzer’s “leadership,” players were out of control. And there was no one to rein ‘em in. As one player said to me late at night near closing time in an Austin bar, “we have a curfew but Switzer’s coaching so who really cares.” And ignoring curfews was going to be the least of their future problems.I hated that year and it hasn’t gotten much better since.Jim Trotter, NFL Media I spent eight years on the Chargers beat, from 1997-2004, and the worst team I ever covered from a win-loss standpoint was the 2000 Chargers squad, which dropped its first 11 games and finished 1-15. That team could do little right: Offensively, it ranked last in rushing and first in turnover percentage. Defensively, it surrendered more touchdown passes than every other club. The most surprising thing about that season was how good the locker room was in the face of those struggles. The players were booed by fans, used as punchlines by late-night comedians, and weekly were prime material for a national radio host who implored them not to “screw it up” and ruin becoming the first team in league history to finish 0-16. Yet, through it all, the players were professional and accountable.The worst team I ever covered from a camaraderie and closeness standpoint was the 2001 Chargers, who after starting 5-2 lost nine straight to end the year. That was the first time I saw up close how a team could splinter if one of its purported leaders was more concerned about himself than the club. That player was quarterback Doug Flutie, North America’s beloved underdog.
Photo by Christopher Ruppel/Getty ImagesI respected Flutie before he arrived in town, feeling he had been the unfair victim of Neanderthal NFL personnel men who looked down on him (no pun intended) because, at 5 feet 10 inches, he didn’t meet the height requirement they wanted at the position. My guess is that the constant drum of naysayers ultimately made it hard for Flutie to accept responsibility when things did not go right, like during the late-season collapse in 2001. He was quick to point the finger and blame others instead of recognizing his complicity.I like to pride myself on never getting personal with my writings, but in hindsight I can see occasions where I crossed the professional line with Flutie. To this day, I’m unsure if he could admit the same.Tara Sullivan, The Boston GlobeThe 2003 Giants thought they were primed for the NFL’s greatest revenge tour. They thought getting robbed by officials at the end of a 2002 wild card game would propel them all the way to the following year’s Super Bowl. They thought one future Hall of Famer on defense (Michael Strahan), one near Hall of Famer on offense (Tiki Barber), and two experienced veterans at coach and quarterback (Jim Fassel and Kerry Collins) would provide the right combination of leadership.They thought wrong.By the time my final season as the Bergen Record’s Giants beat writer was over, the Giants had lost their final eight games on the way to a 4-12 record, the bulk of their roster was on injured reserve, the coach had fired himself with two games to go, and the path toward the two-time Super Bowl champion reign of Tom Coughlin was laid. It had all started out with so much hope, going back to that game in San Francisco. Sure, they’d blown a 24-point, third-quarter playoff lead against the 49ers. Sure, veteran long snapper Trey Junkin was signed off the street only to botch the snap on a potential game-winning field goal. Sure, they were inexcusably denied a second chance when officials missed a blatant pass interference call as punter Matt Allen tried to salvage the broken play. Sure, they couldn’t cover Terrell Owens or contain Jeremy Shockey’s antics. Despite it all, the Giants believed they had the foundation for a future, longer playoff run. 

By Week 2 in 2003, it was obvious fate had other plans when a terrible loss set the tone for the season. Trailing big against a mediocre Cowboys team that was coached by former Giants coach Bill Parcells, the Giants came all the way back, Matt Bryant’s 30-yard field goal giving them the lead. Too bad it came with 11 seconds left on the clock, enough time for Bryant to kick off again. When his kick sailed out of bounds, the combination of a penalty and one big pass by Dallas journeyman QB Quincy Carter set Billy Cundiff up for a 52-yard, game-tying kick. Cundiff would then win the game in overtime with his seventh field goal of the night. The season went downhill from there — blown out by Miami in Week 5, watching Brian Westbrook break them with an 84-yard punt return in Week 7, an overtime loss to the crosstown rival Jets in Week 9, losing to Falcons’ third-string quarterback Kurt Kittner in Week  10, watching an injured Collins give way to the oblivious smilings of future Bachelor Jesse Palmer. By the time the Giants watched those same Cowboys clinch a playoff berth against them in Week 16, Fassel was done, having headed off the inevitable earlier that week by telling ownership he would agree to part ways at season’s end.I was gone by 2004, but the good news for the Giants? Eli Manning was on his way in, the No. 1 overall pick who would go on to win two Super Bowls.Lindsay Jones, The Athletic The 2010 Denver Broncos are, without question, the worst NFL team I’ve covered as a beat writer. (As a national writer, first at USA Today and now at The Athletic, I’ve spent time around teams with worse records and circumstances, the 2012 Kansas City Chiefs come to mind, but this Broncos team was the worst I spent significant time around.) The 2009 Broncos lost eight of their last 10, so it shouldn’t have been a surprise that the 2010 team was a mess. They wound up finishing 4-12, with the league’s last-ranked defense, but that hardly tells the whole story. The whole season was a disaster, and what Broncos fans and Denver media will point to every time Josh McDaniels becomes a hot head coaching candidate. A few of the notable things from that year:
McDaniels was fired after 12 games, after The Denver Post broke the story that the Broncos illegally videotaped the 49ers walkthrough at Wembley Stadium in London.
In December, rookie cornerback Perrish Cox was arrested and charged with felony rape. (Cox was eventually acquitted and was able to resume his NFL career, despite horrendous details in the police report and at the trial.)
In September, wide receiver Kenny McKinley, who was on injured reserve, committed suicide. The team, and McDaniels, handled it with care. Years later, though, it still haunts me.
This was Tim Tebow’s rookie year and the start of the Tebow circus in the NFL. He did not start his first game until after McDaniels was fired, in December.
Oddly, this bad team on the field had one of the better locker rooms I’ve been around. It had two future Hall of Famers: safety Brian Dawkins and cornerback Champ Bailey; a collection of other players who either were, or would become, stars, like wide receivers Demaryius Thomas and Eric Decker (both rookies) and left tackle Ryan Clady; and a number of players who were quality locker room guys and good interviews, like safety David Bruton and offensive lineman Ryan Harris, even in very bad situations.Kimberley A. Martin, Yahoo! SportsPicture it: You’re given your first full-time NFL beat writing job, and it just so happens to be 19 days after “Tebowmania” descends on New York. All I could think about was how I’d spend my first year on a major New York beat at Newsday not writing about football because people would only care about the circus sideshow. And I was right. Mostly. That 2012 Jets season featured a calamity of epic miscalculations, starting with the decision to trade for Tim Tebow, and then not figuring out how to actually use him effectively. In Week 3, the Jets lost Darrelle Revis to an ACL tear. By mid-November, they were 4-6. And then … came The ButtFumble against the Patriots. Three touchdowns. 52 seconds. And a quarterback’s face hitting a dude’s butt. (Oy.)The final weeks of the season featured Mark Sanchez getting benched for Greg McElroy, only to start again after McElroy suffered a concussion, and Tebow finishing the year with six completions for 39 yards and 32 rushes for 102.The “Tebow package” proved to be one expensive (and unnecessary) publicity stunt, and Rex Ryan’s “Play Like A Jet” slogan had a much different connotation than he intended.Les Bowen, Philadelphia Inquirer and Daily NewsI have been doing this for 40 years now and (imagine a grizzled old-timer wagging his finger) I have seen some bad teams. It was very hard to pick just one. I feel like a mother being asked to name her least favorite child. Let me stroll down memory lane.With the 1989 Phillies, I was Paul Hagen’s Philadelphia Daily News backup. The team finished 67-95. Mike Schmidt abruptly retired during a West Coast trip, on Memorial Day weekend. Their best starting pitcher was Ken Howell (12-12, 3.44 ERA) who once had to go on the DL with a finger/hand problem. When this was announced, I approached him and asked how long he expected to be sidelined. Ken Howell informed me that he did not know, because “I ain’t no (bleeping) Nostradamus.”The Phils traded for John Kruk that year, and in one of his first games at Veterans Stadium Kruk knocked in three runs and made a spectacular catch in left field. The crowd loved him. “You can be big here,” I said to him afterward. “Buddy, I can be big ANYWHERE,” Kruk replied. I just teed that one up for him, hanging curveball.The first pro team I covered as the No. 1 beat guy was the 1989-90 Philadelphia Flyers, the first Flyers team to miss the playoffs since 1972, prompting them to fire general manager and franchise icon Bobby Clarke, so that was fun. That season started a run of five years in a row out of the playoffs, and I covered ‘em all, each one a debacle in its own special way.But those teams didn’t have a ton of talent. The 2012 Eagles did — or at least way better talent than their 4-12 record. For that reason, that team has to go down as the worst I ever covered.Andy Reid has built playoff teams in Philly and now in Kansas City, year after year, but 2012 was his 14th season with the Eagles, and both Andy and his message had gotten stale. Early on in Philly, one of Reid’s biggest strengths was the staff he built, but toward the end, this became much less true.
(Harry E. Walker/MCT via Getty Images)Somehow, after a couple of big-name hiring attempts fell through in 2011, Andy let offensive line coach Juan Castillo talk him into letting Castillo become defensive coordinator.  One reason the bigger name hires fell through was that Reid, tired of an anemic pass rush, had already hired a defensive line coach, Jim Washburn, with an eccentric style and an abrasive manner.Reid replaced Castillo with a storied offensive line coach, Howard Mudd. Except Mudd was in poor health and by 2012 took to staying home in California for OTAs and minicamp, communicating with his charges through an understudy.At the end of the disappointing 8-8 2011 season, owner Jeffrey Lurie held a news conference to announce that he didn’t want to see Andy go without giving him a fair chance, so he was going to give the coach another year to turn it around. This sort of dead-coach-walking thing never works, and it didn’t.The 2012 Eagles had Michael Vick, LeSean McCoy, DeSean Jackson, Jeremy Maclin, Trent Cole, Fletcher Cox, Evan Mathis, Jason Peters, Jason Babin, DeMeco Ryans, Nnamdi Asomugha and Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie. Chip Kelly would look like a genius a year later for taking much of the same talent, minus a few malcontents, and going 10-6. But it wasn’t happening for Andy Reid.Training camp started with Reid’s eldest son, Garrett, who had been working with the strength staff, dying of a drug overdose in a training camp dorm room at Lehigh. That burden weighed heavily on everyone. Also, management had assembled a team culled largely from free agency, several of them talented soldiers of fortune who worried mainly about stats and acclaim. There was no chemistry.Asomugha, envisioned as a veteran leader who could teach the youngsters, took to eating lunch alone in his car, to get away from his teammates.Washburn apparently didn’t like 2010 first-round pick Brandon Graham and wouldn’t play him. Washburn – who got into an altercation with offensive coordinator Marty Mornhinweg on the sideline — was fired during the season, and his favorite player, preening, sack-obsessed defensive end Jason Babin, was released. Castillo was fired as well. The team lost 11 of its final 12, didn’t win a home game after September.As the losses mounted, Reid had to call one defensive starter into his office to explain that the player was still getting paid a lot of money, that he owed a decent effort to his teammates and to the fans buying tickets.The whole dispiriting, terrible mess concluded with a 42-7 road loss to the division rival New York Giants, the Eagles barely making the effort to show up on a brutally cold day in North Jersey.The day he announced Reid’s dismissal, Lurie held a gathering in the practice facility cafeteria and presented Reid, the winningest coach in franchise history, with one of those painted “game balls,” this one inscribed with his 130-93-1 overall 14-year record, and a list of accomplishments. Reid, much to his credit, smiled for the cameras. I doubt he kept the ball.Ryan O’Halloran, Denver PostThe first four Jaguars teams I covered for the Florida Times-Union (2012-15) finished 2-14, 4-12, 3-13 and 5-11.The 2016 season– the fourth for coach Gus Bradley and general manager Dave Caldwell – were supposed to be different. There was optimism around Jacksonville. Not plan-a-parade optimism, but a feeling among the fans and media that the Jaguars were on the right track.That’s what makes the 2016 Jaguars the poorest team I’ve covered because they were significantly worse than the sum of their parts.They had an eight-game losing streak. They scored 23 or fewer points in 14 of 16 games. And they blew a 17-0 lead in the season finale at Indianapolis.What made this unusual is the season was basically over in Week 1. No, really. I remember getting back from the locker room and Florida Times-Union colleague Hays Carlyon and I telling each other, “It’s over.” The Jaguars had Green Bay on the ropes but failed to convert a last-second fourth down and lost 27-23. Seven days later, they traveled cross country and took their then-annual whipping from Chargers quarterback Philip Rivers (38-14). In Week 3 at home against the Baltimore, the Jaguars produced three fourth-quarter takeaways … and scored three total points in an eventual 19-17 loss.Fast forward to Week 7 against Oakland. Now 2-3, the Jaguars were feeling good. They shouldn’t have. What followed was the most eventful seven-day stretch of my time in Jacksonville. On Sunday, the Jags committed 13 penalties and two players (Malik Jackson and Jalen Ramsey) were ejected in a 33-16 loss. Mid-week, owner Shad Khan spoke to the team (unheard of for in-season). On Thursday, in a loss at Tennessee, the Jaguars fall behind 27-0 at halftime. On Saturday, offensive coordinator Greg Olson was fired.Three memories of the Titans game:
At halftime, Carlyon and I began dividing up pre-written stories to get ready for when Bradley was fired (timeline of his tenure, what went wrong, new coach hot board, etc.).
Before Bradley’s post-game press conference, I chased down Khan in the bowels of the stadium and he said no coaching change was imminent. 
For the first and only time in my career, I asked a head coach if he was going to be still employed for his team’s next game (Bradley said he expected to and he was right).
The season continued along a road to nowhere but we didn’t think Bradley would be fired until after the season. Wrong again. Good thing we had kept updating our post-firing stories.Bradley was fired after the Week 15 loss at Houston, the only Jaguars game I missed in six years. I couldn’t travel because of kidney stones so I was um, er, uh, relaxed while watching the game on television. After the game, I got a text to be alert. I was able to put all of the in-the-can material online while Carlyon worked the locker room in Houston.Two weeks after the terrible season ended, Khan hired Tom Coughlin to run the football operations, promoted Doug Marrone from interim coach and retained Caldwell as general manager. They reached the AFC title game after the 2017 season.Stephen Holder, The AthleticI actually labored over this question because I had a variety of options. I covered the 2011 Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who finished the season with a whopping 10-game losing streak (after an inexplicable 4-2 start). I also traveled with the 2002-03 Miami Heat, a 25-win team whose best player was 31-year old Eddie Jones. But I’ve reserved the “honor” of the worst team I ever covered for the 2017 Indianapolis Colts.It’s not just their 4-12 record that earns them this title. It was also, to a significant degree, about the circumstances surrounding the team. The frustration of covering this team began long before kickoff. Quarterback Andrew Luck’s shoulder surgery was expected to be a routine labrum repair. But after having played with the injury for almost two years (using therapy instead of surgery to keep him on the field), the rehab went awry and Luck’s shoulder didn’t respond. But because the team didn’t initially understand the depths of those issues, the Colts pressed forward, planning on Luck playing by the fall. It never happened. The Colts opened the season with Scott Tolzien as their quarterback. He proceeded to (I’m not making this up) throw a pick-six interception on his very first pass of the regular season at the L.A. Memorial Coliseum. It wasn’t shocking given the training camp and preseason performances Tolzien had put up, but it served to reinforce the idea that the Colts were in trouble.General manager Chris Ballard had traded for Jacoby Brissett a week before the season opener and by the fourth quarter of that Week 1 game, he was on the field. Coach Chuck Pagano was asked following the 46-9 loss to the Rams whether Brissett, who played respectably that day, would become the starter. He hemmed and hawed, but he had no choice. Brissett started Week 2, before he’d even learned the names of his receivers.The roller-coaster experience of covering Luck’s injury was one of the most mentally exhausting situations I’ve dealt with. He went from being out a few months, to needing a little more time, to finally returning to practice, to suffering a setback to requiring treatment in … The Netherlands, leaving many to wonder if his career was in jeopardy. The only story I’ve chronicled that came close was Alonzo Mourning’s kidney issues that led to a transplant and, eventually, a successful return to the NBA.The Colts were predictably terrible. One loss, in particular, sticks with me. A 27-0 loss to the Jaguars on Oct. 22, the Colts’ first shutout loss in 24 years. Brissett was sacked 10 times that day. After the game, Pro Bowl receiver T.Y. Hilton called out the offensive line while speaking with reporters, setting up a pretty ugly week in the locker room in which apologies had to be issued. As the complexity of Luck’s situation deepened, each week brought with it more hopelessness because the Colts had what arguably was the league’s worst roster without him.What also made this team difficult to cover was the coaching situation. Pagano knew he was done. I knew. Fans knew. Every press conference felt like a futile exercise, like watching a presidential briefing after an incoming president has already been elected. Is anyone really listening? Does anyone really care? Pagano’s fate was such a foregone conclusion he was relieved of his duties by owner Jim Irsay literally 30 minutes after the conclusion of the Colts season finale. Reporters watched Irsay and Pagano enter a room adjacent to the locker room and knew exactly what was happening. For as much as many fans think media revel in a team’s misfortune, the truth is — at least for beat reporters — seasons like this one are no fun to cover. You run out of story angles real fast when the script never changes. You’re also forced to try and find positive angles from time to time, to balance out the daily negativity. But you run the risk of looking as if you’re soft when doing so. In the end, everyone involved – coaches, players, fans, media – all want the same thing: the season to end.