Acclaim for Michael MacCambridge's
AMERICA'S GAME
“First-class reporting and writing. … Author Michael MacCambridge earns
As across the board in this outstanding book. This book, like its author,
has style and substance.”

—The Dallas Morning News
“Welcome to the National Football League, a cultural artifact that causes
thinkers to commit sociology. Michael MacCambridge plumbs these depths
in his fine new book…. It is a rip-roaring epic of Amer ican business.”

—George Will, Newsweek
“Superb … one of the best…. A big winner in terms of content, good
writing and analysis.”

—The Washington Times
“[A] fascinating [and] provocative history.”
—The Austin Chronicle
“MacCambridge presents a compelling account of how foresight and
fortune (good and bad) conspired to make the NFL the nation's most
successful sports enterprise.”

—The Boston Globe
“A well-written, thoroughly enjoyable history.”
—The Baltimore Sun
“MacCambridge's portraits of the key characters in football are riveting

and the details overwhelming. The perfect pick for the die-hard NFL
enthusiast.”

—The Sporting News

“Well-written and ridiculously well-sourced, America's Game demonstrates

an understanding of both the game and the nation in which it is played….
It's a history text and a fine one at that.”

—Palm Beach Post
“An interesting and entertaining and knowledgeable [read]…. [The] game
descriptions are riveting.”

—Houston Chronicle
“With a fan's passion and an insider's knowledge, America's Game … is as
factual as it is dramatic.”

—San Antonio Express-News

AMERICA'S GAME
MICHAEL MacCAMBRIDGE
Michael MacCambridge is the author of The Franchise: A History of Sports Illustrated
Magazine, and the editor of the best selling ESPN SportsCentury. He worked for eight

years as a columnist and critic at the Austin American-Statesman, writing about movies,

music, and popular culture. The father of two children, Miles and Ella, he lives in St.
Louis.

For the home team,

Danica, Miles, and Ella

CONTENTS

PROLOGUE: December 28, 1958
1: Going West
2: The Organization Man
3: “Let Bert Do It”
4: Going Deep
5: Baltimore
6: On Any Given Sunday
7: “A Light Bulb Came On”
8: The Siege
9: The New Frontier
10: The Czar
11: War
12: A Separate Peace
13: “The Only Thing”
14: Respect

15: Prime Time
16: “God, Nixon and the National Football League”
17: America's Team
18: Air War
19: Under Siege
20: The Last Stand
21: Changing of the Guard
22: Pearl Harbor
23: “A Different World”
24: Man at the Top
25: The Main Thing
EPILOGUE: America's Game
AFTERWORD TO THE ANCHOR BOOKS EDITION
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
SOURCE NOTES
BIBLIOGRAPHIC ESSAY

PROLOGUE

December 28, 1958

A

s the sun went down over Yankee Stadium, a series of thunderclap roars filled the
sky, and the crowd surged forward, raucous and intent. The arc lights shone down

on the field, highlighting the condensation floating above the surface, shimmering off

the dark blue helmets of the New York Giants, and bathing the white uniforms of the
Baltimore Colts in an ethereal glow.

While the two teams slugged it out through the fourth quarter, raising dust with every

tackle across the hard dirt infield, the fans grew louder, colder, and more desperate. The

Longines clock on the big scoreboard above the end zone showed just 1:56 remaining in
the 1958 National Football League championship game, with the Giants leading, 17–14.

At that instant, New York's star running back, Frank Gifford, was on one sideline, in an
uncharacteristic rage, yelling that he'd made a first down on the previous play. Across
the field, big Colts defensive end Gino Marchetti sat up on a stretcher, still in uniform,
legs bundled under blankets on the sideline, looking like some vet shot down on the

battlefield. The makeshift tourniquet around Marchetti's just broken ankle was the only
concession he'd made to his injury. As the Colts’ medical staff tried to transport him to

the locker room, he barked that he was going to stay right there until the game was
over.

Sam Huff and the Giants’ defense took the field for a last stand in the chilled

darkness, greeted with another magnificent roar by the Giants fans. At the same
moment, from across the field, the Colts’ Johnny Unitas—his face set in its customary

portrait of gaunt, stoic purposefulness—trotted slowly toward the Baltimore huddle.
Unitas exuded an infectious confidence but it didn't come from any commanding

physicality. His body was ungainly, his legs mere thin stalks, and his football pants
seemed too tight, riding high on his wide, bony hips. But beneath the brush cut flattop

and high, pale brow, he possessed the cool, surveying eyes that could take the measure
of teammates and opponents alike. Bending slightly forward at the waist, his hands
placed softly on his hip pads, he peered in at his teammates.

“We got 86 yards and two minutes,” he said with a voice of flat authority. “Let's get to

work.”

Yankee Stadium, and 45 million sports fans watching NBC's national telecast, looked

on with rapt fascination. The game pitting the Giants, the league's marquee franchise,
against the young Colts squad led by their quietly charismatic quarterback, had taken
on the aspect of grand struggle.

Rather than opening with a short gainer, Unitas began the drive with a long pass,

which fell just beyond the outstretched arms of Lenny Moore. Two plays later, he

converted the crucial third down by hitting Moore over the middle of the field for 11
yards. With fresh life, he found his rhythm, calling a series of deceptive plays, each

going counter to what the Giants’ defense expected. When New York's defense cheated
to the outside, Unitas looked instead over the middle for his end Raymond Berry—the

precise craftsman of fakes and feints who would set a record for receiving yards in a
championship game. And as the clock dipped into its final minute, he connected three

times with Berry in the center of the field, gaining 62 yards. The last completion moved
the ball to the Giants’ 13-yard line, with 20 seconds left, no timeouts remaining, and the

clock still running. The Colts’ field goal unit scrambled onto the field and set up without
a huddle, snapping the ball at the: 07 mark. The inconsistent Steve Myhra, who'd missed
a similar chip shot earlier in the game, kicked it between the goalposts to tie the game
at 17.

With that, the 1958 NFL championship game guaranteed its place in the realm of

sports legend. It already boasted a classic match-up, pairing the glamorous Giants with

the exciting, upstart Colts. It had the requisite controversy that would spark countless
barroom arguments: did Gifford make enough for the first down or didn't he? And when

the last seconds of the fourth quarter elapsed, a crucial third element was added to the
mix, as the game entered a dimension of uncharted territory in spectator sports. The
National Football League had been in existence since 1920 and playing championship

games since 1932. And while a rule had been in place since 1947 stipulating sudden
death overtime in the event a playoff game ended in a tie, such an event hadn't occurred
before.

“What happens now?” said a weary Pat Summerall to captain Kyle Rote on the Giants’

bench. “Now,” said Rote, “I think we play some more.”

Up in the booth, where Giants broadcaster Chris Schenkel and Colts play-by-play man

Chuck Thompson were sharing the call for NBC, Schenkel pointed out that pro football

was about to experience its first venture into sudden death, with the two teams
continuing play until the tie was broken.

“John!” yelled Weeb Ewbank, the short, rotund Colts coach, scanning his sideline for

Unitas. “There's another coin flip—go out there for Gino.” Marchetti, the Colts’ team

captain, obviously couldn't make it to the center of the field with his broken ankle. So

Unitas went to midfield, and listened quietly as the referee explained the simple and
unforgiving rules of the NFL's first sudden death overtime to decide a championship
game: first team to score wins.

At the 50-yard line, Unitas called tails and the referee's coin toss landed heads. As

Huff informed the referees that New York wanted to receive, Unitas looked distracted

and restless, his gaze cast downward and his black high-top cleats casually kicking the

dirt. With the word that the home team would get the ball first, a different sort of
applause rolled through the stands of Yankee Stadium. It wasn't the throaty, predatory
cannonade that had greeted many of the day's events, but instead an exhortative cheer,

more wishful than confident. After the kick, the Colts’ defense stopped New York on
three plays, and the Giants had to punt.

Out came Unitas again, all business, angular jaw set. The twenty-five-year-old

quarterback, who just three seasons earlier had been cut by the lowly Pittsburgh
Steelers, possessed an unexcitability in times of intense pressure that teammates found

both reassuring and inspiring. Moving with a dour, relentless efficiency, he continued

mixing his plays beautifully. He'd fire off passes with his distinctive stoop-shouldered
motion, the follow-through so exaggerated that it concluded with his right hand bent
sharply at the wrist, all his fingers pointing toward the ground.

But the passes were accurate. And when the Colts’ ground game sputtered early, at

third-and-15 on their own 25, Unitas improvised with brilliant daring and surprising
quickness. Fading back to his right, he was set to release to Lenny Moore on a curl

pattern down the right sideline, but as the protective pocket of blockers began to
collapse around him, he pulled the ball back down and started scrambling. With Giants

linemen careening toward him, Unitas shuffled to his left, moved back toward the line

of scrimmage, then went left again. By this point, the Colts receivers had seen him
scrambling and broken off their routes, moving back toward the ball. But Unitas, still
sliding left to elude another pursuer, extended his left arm forward, motioning to

Raymond Berry to move further back down the field, past the first-down marker. Then
he threw a dart to Berry, for just enough yardage to keep the drive alive. With the

Giants’ defense now on its heels, and middle linebacker Sam Huff cheating back to help

his overmatched secondary, Unitas crossed it up again with a trap play to fullback Alan
Ameche, who rumbled for 22 yards. Two plays later came a daring slant pass—rifled at

such a dangerous angle that it sailed between the helmet ear hole and raised arm of
Huff—that found Berry down at the 8.

The 20,000 or so Colts fans who'd bused in from Baltimore were now in a frenzy,

many of them rocking the bleachers in the end zone, imploring their heroes to bring

home the victory.
And in that pressurized instant around the country, 45 million Americans watched

their television screens go black. Then this message appeared:
Please Stand By

PICTURE TRANSMISSION HAS BEEN
TEMPORARILY INTERRUPTED

The rocking of the Colts’ fans had disconnected a cable down on the sidelines, causing

NBC to lose its picture before Berry's catch. After the play, Unitas called a timeout, and
after arriving at the Baltimore sideline asked Ewbank what he had in mind. “Just keep it
on the ground,” said the coach. “We can kick a field goal from here.”

The quarterback took the field again, unaware that the TV audience was in the dark,

and gave his teammates their next assignment. As the team clapped hands to break the

Colts’ huddle, a jowly, middle-aged civilian, with a look of deranged glee on his face,
rushed onto the field and for a time eluded the three New York City policemen who

were in hot pursuit. As the crowd roared at the break in tension, the man was hemmed
in close to the Colts’ huddle, and placed in handcuffs.

Moments later, the picture returned throughout the country, and from the control

booth in the back of a van in the parking lot outside the stadium, NBC producer Ted

Smith exhaled loudly with relief. Newspapers would report the next day that an NBC
technician had managed to reconnect the cable and restore the picture. But it would be

a long time before anyone outside the NBC offices found out that the apparently

drunken fan who ran onto the field during the delay was actually a stone-sober NBC
business manager named Stan Rotkiewicz, who'd been working down on the sidelines as
a statistician. While he couldn't save the game for the Giants, he had saved it for the rest

of America. His intrusion gave NBC enough time to find the disconnected cable and
repair it, missing just one more play, a run into the line that gained one yard.

When NBC got its picture back, it was second down at the seven, and the Giants’

linebackers inched close to the line of scrimmage for another ground assault. But Unitas

defied convention again; he found end Jim Mutscheller open on the right sideline, and

lofted a perfect, feathery toss over Mutscheller's shoulder, with the big end's momentum

after the catch carrying him out of bounds inside the one-yard line. There was still

murmuring in the press box about the apparent danger of such a pass when, on the next
play, a run up the middle called “16 power” in the Colts’ playbook, Ameche took

Unitas's handoff and burst untouched into the end zone—a concert of photographers’

bulbs leaving the flash of time forever frozen in history—to score the touchdown that

ignited pandemonium on the field and rang down the curtain on pro football's

watershed game. The Colts’ fans stormed the field, tore down the goalposts, and
celebrated their city's first championship in major professional sports.

Later, in the locker room, as a jubilant Unitas reacted with uncharacteristic glee to the

news that he'd won a Corvette as the game's most valuable player, reporters wanted to

talk about the final drive. Someone asked him about the pass to Mutscheller. “What if it
had been intercepted? It could have been run all the way back for a touchdown.”

“When you know what you're doing,” he said, turning serious, “they're not

intercepted.”

That day, America found a new icon in Unitas, and a new passion in professional

football. He was invited onto that evening's live broadcast of The Ed Sullivan Show, but

declined the invitation and the $300, he explained, because he wanted to be with his
team. Ameche gladly went in his place, to be greeted by Sullivan and the country.

Three days later, Castro's forces would overthrow Cuba. But on December 28, 1958,

America witnessed the beginning of its own revolution—and this one would be

televised. Like a rebel army seizing the seat of power, pro football had announced its
insurgency with an epic football game at the most hallowed ground in baseball, the
House That Ruth Built.

By the end of the Colts-Giants game, a seismic shift in the American sports landscape

had clearly begun. In another decade, after another New York football team and its
charismatic leader stunned the sports world, football was no longer the rebel, but the
new king. And baseball was no longer America's national pastime.

In the great books of history, it will go down as little more than a cultural footnote: in
the second half of the twentieth century in the United States, pro football's popularity as
a spectator sport grew to eclipse that of Major League Baseball.

But within the narrow stratum of American popular culture, the rise of pro football

and relative decline in the popularity of Major League Baseball seems more momentous,
a demarcation between past and present, not merely in sports but in the culture itself.

This is true for several reasons, among them the speed with which pro football
surpassed baseball, and the fact that well into the 1950s, so few people saw it coming.

To say that baseball was the number one sport in America at the end of World War II

is to imply a hierarchy where none existed. Baseball towered above the sporting

landscape like a colossus, the unquestioned National Pastime, the only game that

mattered. Most fans had come to accept baseball's primacy as something immutable, as
much a part of the natural order of things as air and water.

“Whoever wants to know the heart and mind of America had better know baseball,”

wrote Jacques Barzun in 1954. Barzun's words earned him a place in Bartlett's, and were

still being quoted enthusiastically a half-century later. But in the span of two
generations in postwar America, pro football became a truer and more vivid reflection

of the American preoccupations with power and passion, technology and teamwork,
than any other sporting institution in the country.

As pro football rose in stature and popularity through the ’60s, it was logical to look

for the simplest explanation to account for such a startling change. Many critics viewed
pro football's rise as the inevitable sign of the quickening (and perhaps coarsening) of

the culture or, at the very least, a simple product of one sport being better on television
than the other.

Indeed, it was on television that the differences between baseball and football were

most evident. The writer James Michener's Sports in America marveled at football's

“almost symbiotic” relationship with television, and in 1970, when the sport became a
hit on prime-time television, its incursion into the entertainment culture freed all sports
to follow suit.

By the early ’70s—when even the sport's announcers had become part of the

American celebrity culture, and the Super Bowl attained the status of unofficial holiday
in the nation's civic culture—the change had come. In the space of eleven years,
between 1961 and 1972, the percentage of Americans saying that pro football was their
favorite sport rose 15 points, from 21 percent to 36 percent, while those who said

baseball was their favorite sport decreased 13 points, from 34 percent to 21 percent.

This is a striking shift in any realm, but particularly remarkable in this one. For most
people, a favorite sport was chosen at an early age and kept throughout a lifetime. And
yet during the ’60s, Americans changed those core loyalties in astonishing numbers.

So there became a myth, too frequently told in America, that pro football arrived fully

born on December 28, 1958, a bolt out of the blue, and proceeded to roll across baseball
on the sheer, self-evident power of its magical telegenic power.

But to argue football's inherent superiority on television is to insist that apples are

better than oranges. Baseball telecasts framed the relevant central drama of batter vs.
pitcher more completely and dramatically than a football telecast could document the

complex and interdependent action of the twenty-two players in action on the field at
any one time. And baseball, with its built-in commercial breaks at the end of each half-

inning, was at least as well suited structurally to the medium as football. That football

possessed more action than baseball was an observation often made, but insufficient to
adequately explain its rise over all other sports. Basketball offered more fluidity and

intimacy, hockey more speed and violence.
Equally unsatisfactory was the argument that football excelled on TV primarily

because it satisfied some deep-seated bloodlust of the American sports fan. The first
sport deemed perfect for television was boxing, with its theatrical intimacy, its brutal

and at times bloody action, and its built-in commercial breaks every three minutes. Yet
the story of boxing in the twentieth century is the story of the moth to the flame, of a
sport perfectly suited for television that was all but destroyed because of it.

Television was surely a vehicle for change, and one that pro football exploited

masterfully, but the medium alone cannot explain the rise of the message. So how did it
happen, so swiftly and decisively? The beginnings of an answer can be found in the

long-held American love of sports competition, and the unique structure of professional
football.

Freedom of association is a powerful thing. Every organization in America is

someone's version of utopia. The National Football League in its ascendance was the

perfect, egalitarian vision of commissioner Pete Rozelle. A lifelong fan and former
public relations executive, the Jesuit-trained Rozelle understood that leagues were most

likely to succeed financially when they lived up to the ideals of a higher cause—fair
play.

More than any other person, Rozelle engineered the game's transformation, as Colts

lineman Art Donovan put it, “from being a localized sport based on gate receipts and

played by oversized coal miners and West Texas psychopaths to a national sport based
on television ratings.” The changes Rozelle brought about, as well as the policies he

preserved, reflected this philosophy. Central to his leadership was a thorough
understanding of the principles and practices of mass communication. His mastery in
tailoring the NFL's image for a broad middle-class audience helped make the game more

appealing, both in person and on television. In short, Rozelle sold sports as they'd never
been sold before—as a sophisticated passion, rather than a trivial juvenile pastime.

In 1961, the National Football League's owners voted to sign a national television

contract with CBS, and share the revenues from that deal equally among all of its teams,
regardless of market size or national appeal. This was important at the time, when the

individual team television revenues were wildly disparate and made up a sizable portion

of a team's income. It would become crucial in the decades ahead, when television
exploded into the largest source of revenue in professional football.

While there was much media smirking over the league's “socialist” financial structure,

the idea of a league sharing revenues while in the greatest capitalist society on earth

wasn't a contradiction to Rozelle. His reasoning, passed down from his predecessor, Bert

Bell, and the grizzled elder owners of the league, held that though profits were
important, the sport must take precedence over the business. The self-evident truth that

Rozelle stressed repeatedly was that the business of sports would be most successful if
the competition was as equitable as possible. So the business model that emerged

through the ’50s, ’60s, and ’70s viewed the league's teams not as a number of
restaurants vying for supremacy on a single street, but instead a chain of restaurants,

with every franchise across the country competing among themselves to be the best, but
each dependent on the survival of the whole to truly prosper.

Nearly as important to the growth of the sport in the ’60s was the arrival of the

American Football League. In the century's most tumultuous decade, the “other league”
spawned its own distinct culture, one of combative yet collegial competitiveness. Built

on the same foundation of equal opportunity (it had shared TV revenues equally from
its beginning in 1960) and intense rivalry among teams, the AFL opened up the game
offensively, and opened doors previously closed in pro football, not just to players,
coaches, and entire cities, but to ideas, races, even cultural sensibilities.

A revolution needs both a mastermind and a catalyst. In the thirteen months

following the 1958 Colts-Giants game, pro football would get each, in Rozelle and AFL
founder Lamar Hunt. First separately, then together, they would be instrumental in

bringing about a new era in American sports. The eventual merger between the leagues
that was consummated in the hectic, cloak-and-dagger days of the spring of 1966 was
more complex and treacherous than anyone but a few insiders realized. The irony was

that in spending seven years trying to destroy each other, the feuding leagues

unwittingly accelerated the growth of the sport as a whole. The war between the
leagues brought a level of intrigue that the game had never possessed before, kept

football on the sports pages throughout the off-season, and hastened innovation and

integration. When the leagues finally merged, the whole was stronger than the sum of
its parts.

The peace settlement also brought about a merger of two very large ideas. It was

Rozelle's articulation of the NFL's vision of competitive balance (not just in revenue, but

in competition, collaboration, and corporate outreach) aligned with Hunt's vision of
widespread and wide-open opportunity—a sort of benign, solipsistic Texan arrogance

which assumed that every big city in the country would want its own professional
football team (and ought to get one)—that would eventually meld over the turbulent,
antagonistic ’60s. The result of this mixture would change the face of sports, television,
and the way America spent its Sunday afternoons.

Pro football's rise also tapped into larger social themes—none more important than the
advance of blacks in postwar America. On VJ Day in 1945, there were no AfricanAmericans in the country's major professional team sports. A year later, four blacks
broke the color barrier in pro football, months before Jackie Robinson made his

celebrated debut with the Brooklyn Dodgers. By the kickoff of the 2004 season, more

than 70 percent of the players in the NFL were black, with an even higher percentage

starting and starring for their teams. (At the same time, just as in America as a whole,
African-Americans found fewer opportunities at the highest levels of the industry. There

was movement in the past decade to improve this condition, and sincere effort by many
in the league. But for much of the twentieth century, at least, the colorblind meritocracy
of the game stopped at the edge of the field.)

There was also a sense in which the interior world of pro football—with its draft,

salary cap, revenue sharing, stacked scheduling (giving the best teams the more difficult
schedules the following season), and “equity rule” (dictating that any device used on the

sidelines by one team be made available to the other as well)—was a reflection of the
best impulses of American egalitarian-ism. It was inevitable that some franchises would

still prosper in this atmosphere, but it would be much harder to dominate, and every

franchise, if it placed intelligent people in charge of football operations, had a measure
of hope that was all but impossible amid the Darwinian economic disparity of Major
League Baseball.

Pro football succeeded ultimately because it struck a resonant chord in the American
psyche. In a time of increasing alienation and urban flight, when a sense of community
was dissipating, it unified cities in ways that other civic enterprises could not.

What no one could have counted on, though, was the sheer degree with which sports

fans began to care about, and build their lives around, their respective pro football

teams. The NFL became a reality unto itself, one that far transcended its domain of

Sunday afternoons and, later, Monday nights. From Dallas to Los Angeles, Cleveland to
Baltimore, New York City to Kansas City, modern American men found a truth and
beauty in pro football that was more reliable, more sharply defined, than almost any
other aspect of their lives.

Like the best of the arts, pro football worked on multiple levels. For the loyalists,

there was the fortune of the home team. For neutral or casual fans, there was action,
skill, suspense, and violence. For gamblers, the wagering proposition. For those with a

deeper interest, the game could exist on a larger canvas—as a morality play; a cultural

metaphor; a crucible of values in which teamwork, sacrifice, and dedication were

rewarded, while selfishness, cowardice, and sloth were harshly punished. What those

who were contemptuous of sports misunderstood was not merely that a middle-class
sports fan might revere football to the same degree that an inveterate theatergoer
revered Shakespeare, but that he might do so for many of the same reasons.

This was, to be sure, disquieting to many. There was much in the NFL to comfort

admirers and detractors alike. Its proponents hailed its competitiveness and ecumenical

popularity, as well as its emphasis on teamwork and interdependence. Critics saw a

remorseless world full of impersonal corporate decision making and casual, crippling
brutality. In truth, pro football had become, more than either side cared to admit, a

reflection of the country's double-edged culture itself: big, slick, fast, exciting,
competitive, dangerous, and unforgiving.

At the dawn of the twenty-first century, pro football stood alone as the apotheosis of

modern American sport, a financial and cultural dynasty, both tempted and plagued by
greed and always in danger of overstretch. At the same time, it was a mass media

juggernaut responsible for the ten most-watched television programs in history, and one

of the few solid pieces of common ground left on the increasingly balkanized map of
modern American popular culture.

By that point, the myth had become accepted truth. Pro football's success had come to

seem preordained, the natural result of a faster, more technological society, attracted to
the action and violence delivered by television's all-seeing eye. In part, of course, its
success was due to all of these things.

But a closer examination of the sport's rise in postwar America provides compelling

evidence that pro football's domination was hardly inevitable, the keys to its success
numerous and complex. And the tidal change that altered American sports didn't begin

with the classic 1958 title game, or Lamar Hunt's naive, inspired idea to form a new
league in 1959, or Pete Rozelle's unlikely arrival as commissioner in 1960. Instead, the
seeds had been sown earlier, as far back as the ’40s, when baseball was king and the
country was at war.

1 Going West

Bundled in a heavy winter coat and sporting a beaverskin hat, Daniel
Farrell Reeves dug his hands into his pockets and marched from the
gate bordering the stands out onto the field in the cavernous Cleveland
Stadium. In a matter of hours, his Cleveland Rams would take the field
to play the Washington Redskins for the championship of the National
Football League. But as he surveyed the field in the numbing chill of this
overcast morning two days before Christmas, Reeves could see nothing
on the gridiron but thousands of bales of straw, and a small army of men
laboring to move them. This was pro football in 1945.
Compact and slender, no more than 5-foot-8 and 140 pounds, Reeves
was a man of reserved nature but wry wit. In four seasons, he had grown
accustomed to the perennial financial losses—“Irish dividends,” as he
called them— common to owning a pro football team. But the 1945
season had been uniquely rewarding and frustrating. Reeves had
returned home just two months earlier, after a three-year tour of duty
with the Army Air Corps, to what would become a season-long victory
celebration. America's triumph in World War II had been officially
consecrated during August two-a-days, and the long lines that greeted
the end of gas rationing dissipated by the season-opening win over the
Chicago Cardinals. Just one season after the 1944 squad lost six of its
last seven games, the Rams rebounded to become the surprise of the
NFL, and win their first Western Conference title. In early December,
rookie quarterback Bob Waterfield, soon to be named the league's Most
Valuable Player, was profiled in Life magazine. And though the article

spent less time on Waterfield than his wife—Hollywood bombshell Jane
Russell, star of Howard Hughes's “sex western” The Outlaw, which
censors still hadn't allowed to be screened in the U.S.—the mere thought
that a player for the Cleveland Rams would merit space in Life seemed to
Reeves a miracle in itself.
After the Washington Redskins beat the New York Giants in the
regular season finale, Reeves's dream match-up was set. For the title
game, the Redskins would make their first trip to Cleveland in eight
seasons, bringing along their famed 110-piece marching band to perform
a special Christmas-themed halftime show. Interest was high for the
match-up between the rookie Water-field and perennial All-Pro Slingin’
Sammy Baugh. And so Reeves had bravely decided to move the
championship game from the Rams’ regular stadium, the deteriorating
League Park, with its cramped capacity of 30,000, to Cleveland Stadium,
which seated 80,000.
Six days before the game, the National Weather Service had forecast a
major winter storm hitting the Cleveland area in midweek, so the Rams
had spent the early part of the week searching for enough bales of straw
to cover the tarpaulin, to prevent the field from freezing. It was general
manager Charles “Chile” Walsh who finally located 9,000 bales of straw
from around Elyria, and had it delivered to the stadium at a cost of
$7,200. In the days leading up to the game, eighteen inches of snow fell
on Cleveland, leaving the stadium resembling an arctic snowscape, with
drifts piled several feet high in the aisles.
On Sunday morning, the Rams lined up 275 workers, many of them
off-duty city employees, to remove the bales. While the Rams were
responsible for the field, the city of Cleveland was responsible for the
stadium and the parking lots, which were left unshoveled. Despite the
weather and conditions, the Associated Press projected the game would
draw 50,000, and the New York Times wrote that “a crowd of better than
40,000 is almost certain with a capacity audience of 77,569 possible in
case the forecasters are wrong.”
But when the lights were turned on at Cleveland Stadium at 6:30 the
morning of the game, the temperature was eight degrees below zero.
Marching in mucklucks from the Clevelander Hotel a little before eight,
Reeves bale-fully noted the unpassable streets. There was no parking in

the two blocks closest to the stadium, since that area was overrun with
snow. And taxi service wasn't running to the stadium, another skirmish
in the war between the Rams and Arthur McBride, owner of the
Zone/Yellow Cab Co. and the new Cleveland entry in the All-America
Football Conference, which would begin competition in Cleveland the
following fall.

By 10:30 that morning most of the 9,000 bales had been cleared off
the field. But the trucks that were to transport them away had trouble
gaining purchase on the still clogged city streets, leaving the workers no
choice but to place the straw against the walls surrounding the playing
field. Behind the benches, just in back of the end zones, and stacked
more than ten bales high at the walls, the sea of straw was parted so the
game could be played.
Cleveland Stadium had rarely looked so empty as on this day, when
only 32,178 turned out. When former Rams business manager Manny
Eisner and his wife walked into the stadium about an hour before
kickoff, there were already people filing out, succumbing to the cold. In
the stadium ticket office, Lou Isaacson was more prepared than most.
Dressed in three pairs of socks, knee-high brogan work shoes, two pairs
of pants, two sweaters, and two coats, he sat in the unheated box office
for four and a half hours, and sold two tickets.
In financial terms, Reeves had already resigned himself to the
realization that his share of the gate wouldn't even pay for the cost of
buying, transporting, and removing the bales of straw. But as the kickoff
neared, none of that mattered. Up in the press box, Reeves was nervous
and amiable, greeting writers and VIPs, accepting congratulations for
signing Waterfield to a three-year contract the day before. “The stars are
making so much money now, I call them ‘Mister’ and they just call me
‘Reeves,’ ” he said. When the game began, the joking ended, and Dan
Reeves suffered in silence, as he'd done every game day since 1941,
when he'd bought the team. He paced nervously, far removed from his
wife, Mary, the rest of his family, and his closest friends. It was not a
time to be jovial or even social. It was time for football.
Down on the field, the game sounded different, victim to the noiseless
vacuum of severe cold. There was little kibitzing between the teams, and
almost none of the concussive, amplified smack that so often

accompanied the heavy hitting of professional football. The quality of
play was still sharp, but on a day when the temperature was zero
degrees at kickoff, the players felt the pain more than heard it, each
tackle accompanied by heavy breathing and dull, muffled thuds. The
crowd sounded different as well, its applause muted by layers of gloves,
the cheers rising curt and thin in the icy air.

Even in the ’40s, people argued about whether the pressure of football
built character or revealed it. But Reeves had long ago learned how
capricious the game could be, how random its deciding factors. On this
frigid Sunday, he watched Sammy Baugh's pass from the Redskins’ end
zone hit the goalpost and fall back into the end zone, for what was then
an automatic safety. After Waterfield threw the first of two long
touchdown passes for the Rams, his extra point attempt was partially
blocked, with the ball careening toward the crossbar, hitting it, and
dribbling weakly over. Baugh's freak safety and Water-field's wounded
conversion had been the difference in the 15–14 edge the Rams nursed
into the fourth quarter.
By that time, the windows of the Cleveland Stadium press box had
fogged over, and most of the writers covering the game had abandoned
their typewriters and gone outside into the biting cold, cursing as they
bundled up to face the brutal wind, but drawn to the finish of the frantic
battle below. Reeves himself was outside when he saw the play that
decided the game. With the Redskins nearing midfield in the closing
minutes, running back Steve Bagarus made an end run to the right, then
reversed field and broke free, running in a sweeping arc to the far
sideline, with two Rams in hot pursuit. The first slowed him down and
the second, Waterfield (who in addition to being the star quarterback
was also the team's best defensive back), made a desperate lunge and
extended his left arm before hitting the ground. The contact was scant—
Waterfield's hand barely nicked the toe of Bagarus's trailing foot—but it
was just enough to knock the runner off his feet and save a touchdown.
The Rams’ defense stiffened from there and the Redskins missed a field
goal attempt.
Moments later, the game was over and the Cleveland Rams were
world champions. The hardiest fans stormed the field to tear down the
goalposts in celebration, while the rest of the crowd headed for shelter

and celebration into Cleveland's bars, restaurants, and dance halls. In the
locker room, where the players massed for the traditional celebratory
championship candid photograph, head coach Adam Walsh hugged his
brother, Chile Walsh, and announced, “I knew you were champs back
there at Bowling Green! I knew it! I knew it!”

NFL commissioner Elmer Layden greeted Adam Walsh, his old college
roommate at Notre Dame, with a hug and a handshake. Then Layden
presented Reeves with the league's Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy, given
annually to the NFL champion. “I've been used to losing for so long,”
said Reeves, with tears in his eyes, “that I wasn't counting on anything
until it was all over.”
As Reeves returned with friends and family to his suite at the
Clevelander Hotel, his jubilation was tempered by the private realization
that his time in Cleveland was near its end. Reeves had lost more money
in earlier years, but in the season in which his team had marched to the
world championship, it still lost $64,000. And the prospects for box
office improvement were dim, since the rival All-America Football
Conference would begin play the following season, with a franchise in
Cleveland that seemed to be the strongest in the league.
Reeves had decided, win or lose, that when the NFL held its annual
meeting in January, he would insist on fulfilling his goal, stated for years
in private sessions with the owners, to move his franchise to Los
Angeles. This time, he was determined: Dan Reeves was heading west, or
else Dan Reeves was leaving football.
By the end of World War II, the unique personality and character of
the National Football League had begun to develop. The NFL owners
comprised a particularly hidebound and tightly knit fraternity, loath to
accept outsiders, reluctant to change the often circuitous, inefficient
manner in which proceedings were conducted. Many could remember
the league's earliest years, when it was perceived to be—and for the
most part was—a haphazard assemblage of pickup games and hired
hands making weekend pay.
The Bears’ legendary coach and owner George Halas had been there
from the start, present at the creation of the league, one of sixteen men
in Ralph Hay's Jordan and Hupmobile showroom in Canton, Ohio, in

August 1920. That meeting, called by the league's first president, Jim
Thorpe, laid the foundation for what would be called the American
Professional Football Association, and two years later renamed the
National Football League, though it had no franchises west of Chicago or
south of Washington, D.C.

Its next president, elected in 1921, was the tireless Columbus
promoter Joe F. Carr, who presided over the league's dark ages, in which
thirty-five franchises folded in the league's first ten seasons. At that 1921
meeting, Halas moved the Decatur Staleys to Chicago, where a year later
he renamed them the Bears, and the Green Bay Packers and Earl “Curly”
Lambeau entered the league. In 1925, they were joined by New York
bookmaker Tim Mara, who bought the New York Giants for $2,500,
reasoning that any franchise in New York City ought to be worth that
much.
In 1932 and 1933, the rest of the inner circle came on board. First
there was George Preston Marshall, the bombastic Southern laundry
man, who bought the Boston Redskins in 1932, moving them to
Washington, D.C., five years later. In 1933, “Blue-Shirt Charlie” Bidwill,
Chicago businessman and diehard Bears fan, bought the crosstown rival
Chicago Cardinals, though those closest to him knew the Bears were still
his favorite club.
Then there was Philadelphia's Bert Bell and Pittsburgh's Art Rooney,
who'd met at a horse track in the late ’20s, and whose franchises joined
the league in 1933, the same year that the Pennsylvania state legislature
relaxed its blue laws, allowing sporting events on Sundays. De
Benneville “Bert” Bell, the son of a Pennsylvania attorney general, was a
blueblood aristocrat with a common touch, who spent much of the ’20s
roaring his way through his inheritance. The raconteur Art Rooney, son
of a corner tavern owner in Pittsburgh, was a delightfully egalitarian
personality in his own right. Rooney's team was called the Pirates
throughout the ’30s, before changing its name to the Steelers in 1940.
For most of the ’30s and ’40s, these seven men—Halas, Lambeau,
Mara, Marshall, Bidwill, Bell, and Rooney—were the National Football
League. The ’30s brought hard-earned growth, with liberalized passing
rules, the introduction of a two-division system with an annual
championship game (Marshall's idea), and the first college draft (the

brainstorm of Bell), all introduced under Carr's watch. Through the
decade, the game retained its slangy sense of barnstorming informality.
Pittsburgh head coach Johnny Blood once missed a game because he
simply forgot it was on the schedule. Most players fit practices during
the week around their regular jobs, others came into town on the
weekends and played for less than $100 a game.
The tight band of owners fought like brothers, but persevered in the
face of several rival start-ups, the indifference of much of the American
sporting public, the condemnation of many in college football, and the
failures of several of their partners. Those who remained were cautious,
inherently suspicious of change, and not eager to test their horizons.
In 1936, the Cleveland Rams, who had struggled through a season
with the failing rival American Football League, called NFL president Joe
Carr to apply for an expansion franchise in the NFL. Carr came to
Cleveland, met owner Homer Marshman, and invited him to come to the
next meeting to apply for membership.
“So in December 1936,”recalled Marshman, “I went to the NFL
meeting in Chicago and made my presentation. They told me to sit down
and wait. Next, a man from Houston made his presentation. They
thanked him and told him to leave. I thought that was very impolite
since I was allowed to remain. Next, a man from Los Angeles made a
pitch for Los Angeles. They excused him, too. I couldn't understand it,
because their presentations were every bit as good as mine. As soon as
the two others had left the room, George Preston Marshall jumped up
and said, ‘I move we give it to Cleveland.’ Everybody agreed. It was set
up. They had decided on us in advance. They wanted to keep the teams
in the east and midwest.”

After Carr's death in 1939, the league limped along with former Dayton
owner Carl Storck as acting president. The obese, unprepossessing
Storck, known as “Scummy” during his playing days, had a habit of
opening each league meeting by sitting at the head of the table with a
gavel in front of him and to either side a box of chocolates, from which
he would regularly graze during the discussions. In 1939 and again in
1940, owners tried to interest others in the job. George Halas offered it

twice to Chicago Tribune sports editor Arch Ward, the creator of
baseball's All-Star Game and football's College All-Star Game, the
Tribune’s annual season-opening exhibition between the defending NFL
champions and a team of just-graduated All-Americans. In December of
1939, George Preston Marshall of the Redskins and Dick Richards of
Detroit approached FBI director J. Edgar Hoover about the position.

Storck's resignation in 1941, ostensibly due to failing health, allowed
the owners to rescue themselves from their rudderless state and bring in
a new leader, changing the name of the office from president to
commissioner, and investing it with broad powers, similar to those
enjoyed in baseball by Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis. At Ward's
suggestion, the league summoned Elmer Layden, still a sports legend
from his days as one of Notre Dame's Four Horsemen. Throughout World
War II, Layden held forth at his office at 310 South Michigan Avenue in
downtown Chicago, aided by publicity director George Strickler.
Layden was well regarded in amateur football circles, and his hiring
was meant to bring about a change in the pro game's reputation, making
it more legitimate in the eyes of the public. But his effect proved largely
cosmetic, and even those slight alterations didn't come easily. It took
Layden four years to push through a rule requiring that all players wear
stockings during games. His other cherished innovation was ordering
officials to wear color-coded shirts (referees in black-and-white, umpires
in red-and-white, head linesman in orange-and-white, and the field
judge in green-and-white), a scheme that veteran official Dan Tehan
ridiculed as a “circus on parade.” Little else changed under Layden.
There was still incessant bickering and politicking, and issues were often
determined by a test of stamina as much as any guiding principle. Those
who left the marathon sessions for some sleep might find the issue had
been decided, not in their favor, by the time they returned the next
morning.
And most teams kept losing money. Four seasons after joining the
league, Marshman sold the Cleveland Rams to twenty-eight-year-old
New York stockbroker Dan Reeves. Reeves was one of the keen, restless
obsessives absorbed by the sport and science of football, a sportsman
who found in the game a beguiling combination of action, violence,
camaraderie, and strategy not duplicated in any other segment of

American life save the military when at war.
Born rich, Reeves was neither flamboyant with money nor particularly
obsessed with increasing his wealth. Though he had played football at
Newman Prep in New Jersey as a boy, he didn't like to hit or be hit. He
was not aggressive by nature. But like many men before him, and
millions more to follow, Daniel Reeves loved the game of football for
reasons he could neither articulate nor fully understand. With the wealth
to do whatever he wanted, Dan Reeves wanted to buy a football team.
Asked by a writer in 1941 to explain why he'd purchased the Rams,
Reeves replied,“Doesn't every boy dream of owning a football team?”
The son of a grocery store magnate, Reeves was in a better position
than most to realize his dreams. Upon buying the Rams, Reeves frankly
explained to his fellow owners that he hoped to move the club to Los
Angeles at the earliest opportunity. That, Reeves emphasized, was a
place where the sport could grow and prosper. Before the season was
over, his hopes and plans, like that of most other Americans, would have
to be put on hold.
The final Sunday of the 1941 season saw the Redskins hosting the
Philadelphia Eagles before a crowd of 27,102 (including the young naval
officer John F. Kennedy) at Griffith Stadium, when a messenger found
Federal Bureau of Investigation assistant director Edward A. Tamm in his
seat, and escorted him to the stadium switchboard. There Tamm was
patched into a call with FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover and a special agent in
charge of the bureau's Honolulu office. The agent in Hawaii held his
phone up to the window of his office so that Hoover and Tamm could
hear the bombs and explosions at the U.S. Army base in Pearl Harbor.
On that Sunday, December 7, 1941, at the three stadiums where NFL
games were being played, it was the football writers who learned the
news before almost anyone else. The clattering Associated Press wire,
which delivered updates from the league's other games on its fat roll of
pulp paper, interrupted its staccato reports with the phrase “CUT
FOOTBALL RUNNING” and then delivered the bulletin about the
Japanese attacking Pearl Harbor.
Within weeks of the attack, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt
addressed the dominant question on the minds of sports fans across the

country.
“I honestly feel that it would be best for the country to keep baseball
going,” he wrote in a January 15, 1942, letter to Judge Landis. “There
will be fewer people unemployed and everyone will work longer hours
and harder than ever before. And that means that they ought to have a
chance for recreation and for taking their minds off their work even
more than before. Baseball provides a recreation which does not last
over two hours or two hours and a half, and which can be got for very
little cost. And, incidentally, I hope that night games can be extended
because it gives an opportunity for the day shift to see a game
occasionally.”
There was no mention, either in FDR's letter to Landis, or in any of his
other pronouncements at the time, of what the future might hold for
professional football, or any other sport. Like such rickety and parochial
pursuits as pro basketball and hockey, the sport was left to its own
devices, less dismissed than simply ignored. Though it had already
developed a following in big cities, pro football lagged behind even
college football in terms of national prestige. The most respected
publication in the sport was the weekly St. Louis newspaper The Sporting
News, which was known as “the Bible of Baseball” but ignored football
until 1942, when it began devoting a single page of coverage to other
sports in season.
And although it was football that had been disrupted by the war—the
NFL title game between the Bears and Giants drew just 13,341 people
two weeks later—much of the national sporting press could respond only
in terms of baseball.“Japan was never converted to baseball,” argued The
Sporting News in its December 11, 1941, editorial. “They may have
acquired a little skill at the game, but the soul of our national game
never touched them. No nation which has had as intimate contact with
baseball as the Japanese, could have committed the vicious, infamous
deed of the early morning of December 7, 1941, if the spirit of the game
ever had penetrated their yellow hides.”
As the nation rallied to the war effort and the government reaffirmed
the indispensability of baseball, the very existence of the National
Football League remained in doubt. By May of 1942, 112 of the league's
346 players (32 percent) had been drafted into the armed forces, and

there was little hope that they would be replaced by college graduates.
From the league's Chicago office, Layden worked to keep his league
together, and prove its worthiness to the American effort. “While we
believe professional football has a definite place in the recreational
program of a nation at war,” said Layden, “nothing connected with it
should or will be permitted to hinder the war effort.” Average paid
attendance, which had topped 20,000 for the first time in 1941, fell to
16,144 in
1942. Despite the losses in fans and personnel, the league gave more
than any other sports organization to aid the war effort, contributing
$680,000 in 1942 alone.
But the manpower drain worsened and, even with rosters cut from
thirty-three men down to twenty-five, there was speculation in the
spring of 1943 that only three of the league's eight clubs would be able
to field a team for the season ahead. The Rams—with just eighteen
players left, and both Reeves and minority partner Fred Levy in the
service—were allowed to suspend operations for the 1943 season. Two
months later, the league announced it would go into the season with
eight teams, after the Pittsburgh Steelers and Philadelphia Eagles merged
for the season, to form the “Steagles.” Across the league, talent was
scarce. “We held tryouts at Cubs Park,”recalled Halas,“and signed up
anybody who could run around the field twice.”
In 1944, the Rams returned to action, the Eagles fielded their own
team, but the Steelers had to merge again, this time with the depleted
Chicago Cardinals. That amalgam, known as “Card.-Pitt.” in the
standings, and “the Carpets” around the league, lost all ten of its games.
The owners, always thrifty, became penurious during the war years. For
games in New York City, the Eagles traveled by coach train on the
morning of the game, to avoid hotel expenses, and ate their pregame
meal in the Bronx at Horn & Hardart, the chain of coin-operated
Automat delicatessens. When the Steelers came to New York, they did
stay at a hotel; but instead of chartering a bus to the game, a team
official would give each Steeler a nickel to take the subway to the Polo
Grounds, and another nickel, in the locker room after the game, to

return.
So the league fought manpower trouble, declining gates, and travel
restrictions for the balance of the war. And it operated in the shadow of
baseball, even in its oddities. The NFL's one-armed player (Jack Sanders,
who lost part of his left arm in an explosion at Iwo Jima) received only a
fraction of the attention of baseball's one-armed player (the St. Louis
Browns’ Pete Gray). Over the course of the war, 638 NFL players served
their country, 355 as commissioned officers, and nineteen players died
in combat.
For all that, pro football exhibited a remarkable resiliency.
Attendance, after falling in 1942, rebounded with a smaller schedule of
forty games in 1943 and, by 1944 topped a million for the fourth time in
league history. The NFL's fractious owners had persevered, hung
together, and retained hope that with the end of the war, their prospects
might brighten. Instead, by the end of 1944, they were preparing to face
another, more direct challenge, the greatest in the league's history.
During the war, the league received several applications from
prospective owners in Los Angeles, none of whom were more persistent
or serious than the urbane actor Don Ameche. In 1942, Ameche fronted
a Hollywood group that presented the league with a novel proposal.
Realizing that travel restrictions would be a prohibitive barrier to a Los
Angeles franchise during the war, Ameche's group offered to base the
team in Buffalo for the balance of the war, then move it to Los Angeles.
Though Arch Ward argued his friend Ameche's case privately with both
Layden and the Bears’ Halas, he couldn't convince them or the larger
group that the time was right to expand.
“We owners were a tight little group,” recalled Halas. “We had gone
through a lot together. We had helped one another. … We liked things
the way they were. We did our best to keep things that way. Looking
back I can see how our closed door was certain sooner or later to
produce trouble for us.”
From his bully pulpit as the author of the Tribune’s “In the Wake of the
News” sports column, and with the support of Tribune publisher Colonel
Joseph McCormick, Ward was the most influential sports editor in the
country. When his friend Ameche was turned down, Ward was livid. His

anger became the seed for the NFL's newest challenge.
On June 4, 1944, in St. Louis, Ward gathered a group of investors
from around the country to organize a new professional football league
that would challenge the NFL directly for players and fans. He
announced the formation of the All-America Football Conference a
month later, to banner headlines in the Chicago Tribune. The league
planned to begin in 1945 in eight or ten large cities, including
Cleveland, Chicago, New York, and Los Angeles. “All clubs are financed
by men of millionaire incomes,” wrote Ward, “who are prepared to
engage in a battle of dollars with the National Football League, if
necessary.” Shortly thereafter James “Sleepy Jim” Crowley, one of
Layden's partners in the Four Horsemen backfield, was installed as
commissioner. The All-America Football Conference was a logical step,
argued Ward, who noted that baseball's American League was founded
twenty-four years after the National League, and that the NFL had just
completed its twenty-fourth season.
At first, the established league's attitude was dismissive. “I did not
realize there was another league,” said the Redskins’ George Preston
Marshall, when asked about the AAFC, “although I did receive some
literature telling about a W.P.A. project.”
But the AAFC's legitimacy was soon clear. In February of 1945, the
new franchise in Cleveland announced that Ohio State coach Paul
Brown, by then serving his war duty by coaching a football powerhouse
at Great Lakes Naval Academy, would coach the Cleveland franchise
after the war. Three months later, the AAFC held a meeting in Chicago,
and Brown and Chicago Rockets owner John L. Keeshin were appointed
to represent the AAFC in seeking a meeting with Layden to discuss
“working agreements on a players’ draft, players’ salary limits,
schedules, inter-league games, anti-raiding policies, etc.”
When the Tribune called the NFL offices for comment about the
delegation, Strickler argued to Layden that he should make some kind of
statement explaining why he wouldn't meet with Brown and
Keeshin.“All I know is what I read in the newspaper,” Layden told the
press. “There is nothing for the National Football League to talk about as
far as new leagues are concerned until someone gets a football and plays
a game.”

The off-the-cuff comment, extensively reported at the time, would be an
element in Layden's eventual undoing. At a football luncheon attended
by both Crowley and Layden later in the spring, the AAFC commissioner
opened his remarks with a football under his arm, saying, “Look, we
have a football.” More than a year later, the quote and its rejoinder were
still reverberating. Paul Brown was one of several AAFC figures
photographed with dozens of footballs, next to the inevitable caption,
“Hey, Elmer, Now They've Got a Ball.”
Though the war forced the upstart league to delay its launch,
announcing early in 1945 that it wouldn't begin play until 1946, the
AAFC owners were better financed than those in the NFL. And Ward's
influence garnered them plenty of publicity.
So for the NFL, the 1945 season had the air of both prelude and
valediction. The giddy postwar aura of triumph and possibility was
there, but it coexisted alongside a deeper and broader sense of crisis,
that the league's very existence was again on the line. The tension would
lead to the extraordinary events in the first month following the 1945
season, marking the dawn of the modern age of pro football, expanding
the horizons of American sports, and setting the stage for the NFL's rapid
ascent over the next quarter century.
Among the cantankerous NFL owners, frequent rumbling about Elmer
Lay-den's performance had existed for years, and were exacerbated by
the rise of the AAFC. Many felt that Layden didn't have the stomach for a
good fight, especially one with his friend Arch Ward. But as late as the
title game in Cleveland, his job was considered secure. Then came the
news that Dan Topping, owner of the NFL's Brooklyn Dodgers, was
taking his team out of the league and joining the AAFC. Topping, who
also owned the New York Yankees in baseball, was one of the NFL's
wealthiest and most visible owners. Layden had been unable to settle the
squabble over Sunday home dates between Topping and Giants owner
Tim Mara.
The NFL's 1946 annual meetings were scheduled to start Friday,
January 11, at the Commodore Hotel in New York City. They in fact
began the night before that, when a group of owners gathered at the

Commodore and agreed among themselves not to renew Layden's
contract. The Redskins’ George Preston Marshall had arrived in New
York vowing, “Layden will be reelected over my dead body.” The next
day, when Layden banged the gavel to begin the meetings, he did so to
an empty conference room. Returning to his hotel room, he received
official word later that the owners had voted on his ouster.

“Layden was forced out,” Strickler explained years later, “because he
had not been able to bring himself around to using [his] power. Poor
Elmer really never got out of college. He had been brought up on and
could not break away from the amateur approach to football…. He was
just beginning to catch on when they dumped him.”
For their new commissioner, the owners drafted one of their own: Bert
Bell. By the end of the war, a series of financial setbacks had forced him
to sell the Eagles and take a minority position with Art Rooney's
Pittsburgh franchise. Among the best-liked owners in the league, Bell
also was the only one of the inner circle willing to give up his ownership
stake to take the job. With his partner Rooney remaining as the owner of
the Steelers, Bell accepted the owners’ offer of the $20,000-per-year job.
He was presiding on Saturday morning, January 12, when the 1946
annual meeting officially got underway, with Marshall formally
nominating Bell for the position he'd already accepted.
Then it was time for the owners to hear from the Rams. As Dan Reeves
sat quietly at the conference table, general manager Chile Walsh made a
passionate case that the league should allow the Cleveland Rams to
move their operations to Los Angeles.
Walsh reminded the owners that the Rams had suffered daunting
financial losses during the war, and lost money even in their
championship season. They now faced a challenge from the AAFC's
Cleveland contingent, likely to be the most formidable entry in the new
league. After years of planning for California, they had a chance of being
able to play in the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum and had also, as a
fallback, inquired about the Cotton Bowl in Dallas. But the team, and the
league, needed to go to California now, Walsh argued, or else cede the
entire territory to the two AAFC teams—the Los Angeles Dons and San
Francisco 49ers—which would begin play in the fall of 1946.

Eight votes were needed to approve a transfer, but as in years past,
consensus could not be reached. Six teams supported the move, three
were opposed, and the Green Bay Packers abstained. As the voting was
completed, Dan Reeves stood up and spoke for the first time during the
meeting. “And you call this a national league?” he asked. “I suppose
Texas doesn't interest you, either?”

Halas, speaking for those opposed, explained that the owners didn't
want to face the exorbitant costs of traveling outside the league's
geographical area.
“If that's your final word,” Reeves said, turning to leave, “then I am no
longer a member of the National Football League. Consider the
Cleveland Rams out of pro football.”
This wasn't the first time, nor would it be the last, that an owner had
stormed out of a league meeting. But with the gravity of Reeves's
complaint, and the fresh memory of Topping's defection weighing heavy
on the occasion, Bell called a recess to his first meeting as commissioner.
Halas, Bidwill, and Marshall were dispatched to Reeves's hotel suite to
bring about a truce. Their initial entreaties were ignored, as Reeves
retreated to his bathroom and shouted, at one point, “It's either Los
Angeles or Dallas, or nothing.”
With that, the three other owners began discussing a way to
accommodate Reeves while addressing concerns over the heightened
travel expenses of West Coast trips. At 2:00 p.m., when the meetings
reconvened, they'd talked both Reeves and their partners into supporting
the move provided Reeves agreed to offer all visiting teams an extra
$5,000 above and beyond the $10,000 road team guarantee, for all
games in L.A. That afternoon the National Football League became
America's first truly national sports league, with franchises from coast to
coast.
As Reeves left the Commodore, he was beaming over the pending
move. “Now I just need to ratify the decision with my family.” In fact, he
was less concerned with the response of his wife and children than with
the reaction the Rams would get three days later in front of the Los
Angeles Coliseum Commission, which had effectively banned pro
football from its stadium for more than twenty years.

The NFL's record book shows a team in Los Angeles for a single season in
1926. In fact, the Los Angeles Buccaneers never played in Los Angeles.
They were based in Chicago, largely because they couldn't get
permission to use the Los Angeles Coliseum, where Red Grange had
played in front of 75,000 fans in his barnstorming tour with the Chicago
Bears the previous winter. Since then, there had been an unofficial ban
on pro teams at the Coliseum, whose governing commission—comprised
of three representatives from city, county, and state government—was
brimming with alums of Southern Cal and UCLA, two schools conscious
of maintaining college football's primacy on the West Coast.
Reeves had positioned himself to break that ban. Months earlier, he
had lined up an exhibition game at the Coliseum, to be played between
the Rams and Redskins in August 1946, with proceeds going to the Los
Angeles Times Charities. With that foot in the door, he felt that the move
would get a measure of support from Los Angeles political leaders. What
complicated matters was the other professional football applicant,
Ameche's Los Angeles Dons of the AAFC, who also wanted a contract to
play at the Coliseum.
For his part, Reeves had moved cautiously in the press, stating
carefully that the matter shouldn't be seen as one that pitted college
football against pro football, or one pro league against another. “If the
Coliseum commission wants to let another club in, that will be all right.
With the California climate, and lights in the Coliseum, there is no
reason the whole thing can't be worked out to everyone's satisfaction.”
When Coliseum Commission chairman Leonard Roach arrived at the
stadium for the hearing that Tuesday afternoon, January 15, 1946, he
was approached by three members of the black press, Halley Harding of
the Los Angeles Tribune and Herman Hill and J. C. Fentress of the
Pittsburgh Courier, the leading black newspaper of the era, which
promoted a “Double V” during the war, signifying victories over fascism
and imperialism in the war, and over racism at home.
As with major league baseball, pro football was segregated at the time,
not by rule or law, but by practice and custom. Numerous blacks had
played with the town and factory teams of the league's early years, but
since the 1933 season—when the black running back Joe Lillard played
for the Chicago Cardinals and a tackle named Ray Kemp saw action with

Pittsburgh—not a single black player had received so much as an
invitation to training camp, even during the desperate manpower
shortages during the war.
While the canard that blacks couldn't compete with whites was
preserved in baseball by segregation throughout the minor leagues, the
myth of white superiority was harder to maintain in football, where
blacks were starring for integrated college teams across the country,
excelling not just in exhibitions (as in baseball) but throughout the
season and in high-profile bowl games.
Few players had shone as brightly as UCLA's Kenny Washington in the
late ’30s. Washington led the nation in total offense in 1939 and Bob
Waterfield later described him as “the best football player I ever saw.”
Though a scoreless tie against Southern Cal in 1939 prevented UCLA
from going to the Rose Bowl, Washington received a standing ovation
from the sellout crowd of 103,000 at the Los Angeles Coliseum, a scene
that prompted syndicated columnist and future TV star Ed Sullivan to
write, “I have never been so moved emotionally, and rarely so proud of
my country.”
Jackie Robinson, who had been Washington's backfield mate at UCLA,
later called him “the greatest football player I have ever seen. He had
everything needed for greatness—size, speed and tremendous strength.
Kenny was probably the greatest long passer ever.”
Despite the acclaim and the accomplishments, Washington wasn't
selected in the 1940 NFL draft. In an “open letter” sent over the
airwaves that year, NBC broadcaster Sam Balter asked NFL owners why
none of them chose the player that most experts agreed was “not only
the best football player on the Pacific Coast this season, but the best of
the last ten years and perhaps the best in all that sport's glorious football
history—a player who had reduced to absurdity all the All-American
teams selected this year because they did not include him—and all know
why.”
When he traveled to Chicago to play in the College All-Star Game in
August 1940, Washington's performance prompted New York Daily News
columnist Jimmy Powers to call on New York owners Tim Mara and Dan
Topping to bring him into the league. “He played on the same field with

boys who are going to be scattered through the league,” wrote Powers.
“And he played against the champion Packers. There wasn't a bit of
trouble anywhere.” After the game, Washington recalled that the Bears’
Halas asked him to stick around Chicago for a week, “and he'd see what
he could do for me. I waited for about a week and then was told that he
couldn't use me.” For the next six seasons, Washington spent much of his
time playing for Paul Schissler and the Hollywood Bears in the Pacific
Coast League, where he injured his knee so badly he couldn't qualify for
active military duty. For the balance of the war, Washington played
sporadically for the Hollywood Bears and traveled on the USO tour,
making stops from Alaska to the Burma Road.
So when Roach arrived for the commission meeting, Harding and his
colleagues were ready, with the argument that those in the black press
would be opposed to opening up the Coliseum if the pros continued to
exclude athletes who, in Harding's words, “happen to be colored.”
“Well, fellows,” said Roach. “I am against Jim Crow, not only in pro
football but in all other forms.” Roach said the group should select a
representative, who would speak at the hearing.
At 2:45, in a packed conference room on the second floor of the
Coliseum's small administration building, the meeting was called to
order by Roach. The first order of new business was the use of the
Coliseum for professional football, and prepared statements were
delivered by Chile Walsh for the Rams and general manager Lloyd
Wright of the Dons, after which Roach asked if anyone else had anything
to say.
At that, the immaculately dressed Harding rose to his feet and
addressed the gathering, with a calmly eloquent oratory about the
injustice of racial segregation in sports. He spoke first of the long history
of Negro athletes in pro football, invoking the names of Fritz Pollard,
Paul Robeson, Sol Butler, and Duke Slater, all standout professionals in
the NFL of the ’20s, who were later excluded from the league.
Harding pointed out that blacks had been excluded from the NFL for
more than a decade, and he blamed the Redskins’ segregationist owner
George Preston Marshall for keeping the racial barrier up on a leaguewide basis. Then he cited the case of UCLA's Kenny Washington, and

argued that it was “singularly strange that he had never been signed by
any team in the National League.” Before finishing, Harding reminded
the meeting that blacks had fought for American freedoms overseas, and
now deserved those same freedoms at home.

As Harding sat down, an electric silence filled the room. Commission
member Roger W. Jessup asked if it was true that no team in pro
football would play with or against “our Kenny Washington.” Another
board member, John Anson Ford, praised Harding for his stand.
Asked to respond to Harding's speech, Chile Walsh at first repeated
what others in the league had long claimed—that there was no written
rule against blacks playing in the NFL. But then he went a crucial step
further.
“Kenny Washington is invited by me at this moment to try out for the
Los Angeles Rams team,” Walsh said. He added, “I will submit a
gentleman's agreement that if you can deliver me Buddy Young on
completion of his graduation from the University, I will sign him.”
Young, then preparing for his senior season at Illinois, was considered
one of the country's best running backs. Two weeks later, the
commission voted unanimously to approve the Rams’ petition.
And so on May 4 as promised, the Rams signed Washington to a threeyear contract. Later in the summer they signed another black player, his
Pacific Coast League teammate Woody Strode, an end from Illinois.
Neither would have much of an impact on the game. Washington's knees
had been ravaged more than anyone knew. Strode, at thirty, also was
past his prime (and already well along on his career in acting). But that
fall, the two men would make the team, and play, without a major
public racial incident, effectively reintegrating the NFL.
So in a matter of days in January 1946, the National Football League
had moved west, at a time when Major League Baseball's horizons were
still bound by the Mississippi River. And the league integrated, with
little national fanfare, at a time when Jackie Robinson was still toiling in
the minor leagues for the Dodgers’ AAA farm club, the Montreal Royals.
In July, the Los Angeles Rams reported for training camp. Though a
movie star owned the rival Dons, the big stars were with the Rams.
Waterfield's marriage to Russell had made plenty of headlines, and

teammate Tom Harmon had taken up with Hollywood starlet Elyse
Knox.
That summer, the Rams held their training camp at Compton Junior
College, a few miles south of downtown Los Angeles, and site of one of
the most powerful junior college athletic programs in the country. Each
of Los Angeles’ six major dailies covered the early days of camp at
Compton, with predictably suggestive asides about Waterfield's wife (“I
venture to say,” wrote the Times’s Vincent X. Flaherty, “that if Daniel
Farrell Reeves can promote Russell into assuming that billboard posture
of Sabbath afternoons, he will pack the whole coliseum and will have
wild young men spilling over the walls”).
The most prominent of L.A. sportswriters, Times editor Paul
Zimmerman, showed up to file as well. He was one of many to be
impressed by the crack job done by the Rams’ publicity staff, which was
aided by personnel from Comp-ton, including a lanky, tanned, amiable
student assistant, who seemed particularly adept, dispatching the daily
news briefings, always willing to help the writers with whatever they
needed.
“That kid you've got is good,” Zimmerman mentioned to Goldie
Holmes, Compton's athletic director, at camp one day. “What's his
name?”
Holmes informed him that the young man who delivered the hot
coffee, made sure the press releases were free of typos, and was even
then working on the paste-up pages for the Rams’ intrasquad game
program, was a well-mannered, whip-smart Compton College student,
recently back from the war, by the name of Pete Rozelle.

2 The Organization Man

At 8:30 in the morning, Monday, July 29, 1946, at the Alpha Xi Delta
sorority house on the campus of Bowling Green University, fortynine football players sat in seven neat rows of desks, arranged in
alphabetical order. The name of each player was written on masking
tape, affixed to the front-facing backrest of each chair, so the speaker
standing in front of the room could tell at a glance who was missing or
late. On this morning, all the seats were filled, and had been for several
minutes.
Standing in front of the classroom, dressed in brown pleated slacks, a
crisply pressed white T-shirt, and a baseball cap, Paul Brown looked out
at the assembled players and, as the second hand swept across the 12,
began his first address to the Cleveland Browns football team with the
words, “Call me Paul.”
His voice was an arid, Midwestern tenor, free of accent or
flamboyance, but tinged with an edge of precise rectitude, and the
clipped cadences of a former English teacher, which he was. “We will be
the most amateur team in professional sports,” he vowed. “I don't want
fellows who are strictly professional. I don't want you to think of the
money you'll be making; rather I want you to think of the game first and
the money second. We'll start just as we started when I coached at
Massillon. It'll be just like it was there, at Ohio State and at Great Lakes,
and those of you who were with me at those places know exactly what I
mean. We'll coach the pro team the same way we coached the others.
That means we'll start on the ground floor with fundamentals.” That

meant the afternoon session would be devoted not to the first practice
but instead a lecture instructing the team how it would conduct its
practices, followed by a test run through calisthenics.
In an era when most pro football training camps were ragged, casual
affairs, Brown's approach was not a departure so much as a
counterattack, a repudiation of a quarter-century's worth of business-asusual in the sport.
Later that morning, the assistant coaches distributed green three-ring
binders, and Brown explained that all the plays and terminology they
would learn in the weeks ahead would be copied down by each player.
“Everything we do, everything expected of you, will go in here,” he said.
“I will call in the notebooks without warning. They will be graded. A
sloppy notebook means a sloppy player. Star or rookie, you will be
gone.”
The remainder of Brown's morning speech summarized the
unprecedented social contract between a professional football coach and
his players. In it, he laid out the rules that his players would be expected
to live by, not just during training camp but throughout the season.
“Don't set up any love nests in Cleveland,” he warned. “We're going to
find out where you live. If you sneak out after bed checks you'll be fined
and you'll read about it in the paper, and I'll be the first to tell your wife.
Keep your wives out of football. Don't have your wife talk football with
other wives. It breeds trouble. I don't want one wife complaining to the
wife of the quarterback that her husband is being overlooked as a pass
receiver.
“I ask you to wear a sport shirt to dinner. At the table, keep the meal
enjoyable … it's no place for pigs…. Try to avoid cliques. Know all your
teammates. Class always shows.”
And in closing, the purposeful man gave his team a clear goal.
“I want this team to be the darling of professional football,” he said.
“We're starting from scratch, and I want you to think in terms of being
the best. We'll settle for nothing less than a winner. When you think of
baseball, you immediately think of the New York Yankees. When you
think of golf, Bobby Jones comes to mind. When you think of boxing, it's
Joe Louis. One of these days when people think of football, I want them

to think of the Cleveland Browns.”
What would in fact happen, in the coming years, was that when
people would think of football, they would think of Paul Brown. The
head coaching job in Cleveland, which he'd accepted in the spring of
1945, was the last in an audacious series of jumps that had taken him
from a just-graduated newly wed, coaching at an obscure prep school in
1931 to the pinnacle of his profession, in just fifteen years. For the next
decade, his team would dominate professional football and his methods
would reshape it. The program that he set in place in Cleveland was the
culmination of an adult life spent viewing football not as a sport but a
field of study, worthy of the fine and close attention of academic
inquiry. Others would have to learn to do the same if they hoped to
compete.
Massillon, Ohio, lay just eight miles to the west of Canton, connected
by the old State Highway 30 and the kind of fraternal competition
between close communities that has fueled sports rivalries for ages.
Canton in the early twentieth century was both a political hotbed
(hometown to President William McKinley) and an industrial center, full
of steel mills and other factories. Its neighbor Massillon, where Paul
Brown grew up, was a bustling steel town and port city, lying on the
heart of the old Ohio & Erie Canal, which connected the Ohio River and
Lake Erie. Brown's parents, Lester and Ida, had moved to Massillon, for
Lester's job as a telegrapher and chief dispatcher on the Wheeling & Lake
Erie Railway.
Young Paul Brown was just 120 pounds when he went out for the
Massil-lon Washington High School football team in the August prior to
his freshman year. By his junior year, he was the starting quarterback, a
140-pound package of preternatural authority and intelligence. During
his senior season, Brown was suggesting substitutions, and head coach
Dave Stewart was listening. “He was like a banty rooster, full of
authority and self-confidence,” said Stewart. “When he was my
quarterback, his voice rang with inspiration as he called the plays. The
kids believed in him and he ran them like a Napoleon.”
By the time he'd graduated from college, at Miami University in
Oxford, Ohio, Brown had begun to doubt whether he really wanted to
fulfill his father's wishes of becoming a lawyer. Instead of law school, he

accepted a teaching job at Severn, a naval preparatory school in
Maryland, where he'd also be able to coach the football team.
His course was set. Within two years, he returned to Massillon as head
coach, and proceeded to turn the moribund program into the premier
football power in the state, compiling an 80-8-2 record over nine
seasons. It was during these years that Brown's innovative coaching
techniques, and his competitive urge to acquire quality players, began
engendering both respect and resentment. Len Dawson, who'd later play
for Brown in the pros, recalled growing up in nearby Alliance, Ohio.
“There were rumors back in high school that he'd have telephone repair
people coming over here to our practice facilities at Alliance High School
to see what we were doing.”
One key to Brown's success was his ability to elicit a community-wide
dedication to the game. The booster club drew 2,500 fans to the regular
Monday night dinners. In his final season at Massillon, 1940, the Tigers
drew 182,500 people to their ten games.
Late that year, the most visible coaching job in the state opened up,
and Paul Brown was named the head football coach at Ohio State. He
found instant success, going 6-1 his first season, then winning the
national championship in 1942. He was perfectly suited for the college
life, with its strict schedules, malleable athletes, and frenzied school
spirit, and with the football team at the absolute center of the school's
social whirl.
In 1943, with many of his front-line players drafted or enlisted in the
military, Brown suffered his first losing season as a coach, capped by a
painful blowout loss to Michigan. The lesson he learned, of the ultimate
importance of personnel—“You've got to have a phenomenal animal”—
would remain with him for the rest of his career. The next year, 1944, he
entered the service himself, taking what was to be a temporary leave
from Ohio State. He was placed as the athletic director and football
coach of the Great Lakes Naval Station outside Chicago, where in two
years he led the school to upset wins over several national powers.
He also developed a reputation as a man who was not to be trifled
with. He abstained from drinking from the first day of training camp
until the end of each season, also giving up gin rummy and golf during

the campaign. “Paul was a stickler for details,” remembered Marion
Motley, who first played for Brown at Great Lakes. “Paul was sitting on a
train one Sunday afternoon at the same time me and another player, a
young kid, were sitting in another train on the same track. We were
going out on liberty. This kid I was with didn't see Paul. But Paul saw
him. The kid had a cigarette in his hand. On Monday morning, Paul fired
the kid. They sent him to Iwo Jima, I think.”
Many Ohio State fans were surprised in 1945 when Brown announced
that he was taking a job coaching a pro team, and a fledgling one at
that. But those who knew him best understood his smoldering
resentment over his perceived mistreatment at the hands of the school
administration and athletic director Lyn St. John (whom, Brown felt,
welcomed him back to his old job with less enthusiasm than was
warranted). Then, too, there was Cleveland entrepreneur Mickey
McBride's pitch: a $1,500 a month retainer for the remainder of the war,
a $25,000 salary commencing with his discharge from the navy, and a 5
percent stake in the team.
But what Brown found irresistible was the opportunity to create his
own team, from the ground up, and then concentrate exclusively on
football. Rather than fitting in practices for students who were spending
most of their time taking college classes, or preparing for naval training,
his players would take classes in football, and prepare solely for football
games.
To appreciate what a revolutionary Brown was in the ’40s, it helps to
understand not just the sport's humble beginnings but its brutal, and at
times sluggish, development. For twenty-five years, George Halas and
some of the more enlightened caretakers of the game had been seeking
to rescue football from the worst excesses of its own inherent brutality,
the monotonous repetition of roughneck factory workers engaging in
monster scrums—a delight for the factory workers, but less interesting
for spectators. In the ’30s, the sport was, in the words of historian Robert
Smith, locked in “the thralldom of tradition that seemed to have doomed
it to remain, especially if the field were wet, a slam-bang, grunt-groan,
pull-devil, pull-baker affair that was occasionally less fun to watch than
an honest wrestling match.”
The forward pass rules, liberalized in 1933, had helped, and the

innovations of T formation mastermind Clark Shaughnessy, with Ralph
Jones's man-in-motion wrinkles (which moved more action away from
the congested center of the field), had brought a greater element of
strategy and grace to the game. As personified by the Bears’ epochal 73–
0 rout of the Redskins in the 1940 NFL title game, and the Shaughnessycoached Stanford team's 21–13 win over Nebraska in the Rose Bowl
weeks later, football took on an aspect of artful dodging, with
quarterbacks like Stanford's Frankie Albert duping teams with nimble
spins and well-concealed fakes.
The T helped to civilize the game further because it put an even
greater emphasis on skill and speed over raw strength. Quarterbacks had
a wider array of faking options, and with the quickness in getting the
ball-carrier to the hole, blocking became a more nuanced process of
delaying or interfering with a defender rather than flattening him.
Personnel were still crucial, but strategy and tactics mattered as well.
And the glimpses of this game, while still rough, encouraged the sort of
spectacular action and dense strategy that was rarely combined in any
single sport.
While Halas and Shaughnessy worked on tactics, Brown was
convinced that the principles of organization, never observed in a
systematic way in the sport, could make the difference. In this way, he
was part of a civilizing continuum, helping to bring intelligence, skill,
and strategy to the game.
Throughout the war, as the T formation gained prominence in
playbooks at every level of football, coaches everywhere were
scrambling to adjust and understand it. Brown, like so many other
single-wing coaches at the start of the ’40s, was forced to play catch-up.
He coached the single-wing throughout his time at Ohio State but upon
arriving at Great Lakes, decided to experiment with the T, and spent
some time attending Bears practices.
Brown was still in the military when he accepted the Cleveland job, but
through assistant John Brickels he engaged in a remarkably
comprehensive recruitment of talent, searching far and wide to find the
“high-class people” he was looking for to fill his football team. The

circumstances were extraordinary; Brown could not have built up such
an arsenal of players limited by the strictures of a draft in an established
league. Nor, under a less benevolent and less wealthy owner, would he
have been able to offer the salaries and monthly retainers that McBride
was willing to pay.

While colleges waited for their stars to return to campus, Brown
sought out players who'd played for him or against him, and wrote them
to ask them to consider turning pro. The letters he sent came as part of
the standard military mail call, small slips in the mountains of
information, care packages, mash notes, and correspondence that
crisscrossed the globe during World War II. The letters bore the return
address of the new franchise, 405 N. Leader Building in downtown
Cleveland, and contained a personal letter from Paul Brown. The offers
that accompanied the contracts weren't just generous, but unique: a
retainer for players of $250 per month for the balance of the war, a
signing bonus of as much as $2,500, and salaries up to $7,500.
Brown didn't march out and try to sign a dream team of AllAmericans. He had kept a dossier on the players he coached and played
against at Massil-lon, Ohio State, and Great Lakes, and these were the
primary contacts he used to assemble his squad. He started with his
quarterback. Brown was convinced that to run the T effectively, a team
needed a quarterback who was both a natural leader and an all-around
athlete. When the time came in 1945 to start assembling a pro team,
Brown sought for his quarterback “an artist throwing the ball; a
particular kind of guy; a quick thinker; a finesse man.” Typical of his
vision for the game, the man Brown had in mind for his T formation
quarterback had never played the position before.
The only loss Brown's Ohio State team suffered in 1941 was an upset
at the hands of Pappy Waldorf's undermanned Northwestern team. The
key play was engineered by Otto Graham, the Wildcats’ star tailback.
With the score tied, Graham took a deep snap from his tailback position
in the single-wing, and followed a wall of blockers toward the left on
what looked like an end run. Stopping nimbly and squaring his
shoulders, Graham threw a long touchdown pass across his body and
down the right sideline. Brown never forgot it, and he sensed that
Graham possessed the ideal blend of skills for the position.

With a shock of close-cropped black hair and thick eyebrows that set
off a sharply handsome face, Graham was a terrific athlete and model
student, clean as milk, who seemed to excel at everything he pursued.
Invited to Northwestern on a basketball scholarship, he was also a multiinstrumentalist adept at the piano, the violin, the cornet, and the French
horn, which he played for one year in the Northwestern student
orchestra.
After graduating early, Graham went to Carolina Pre-Flight, as part of
the navy's V-12 flying program, where he was contacted by Brown, who
signed him to a $7,500 contract, with a $250 monthly stipend during the
balance of his time in the military.
Once Graham was signed, Brown cast a wide net for players in service
around the globe. Lou Groza was working with a medical battalion
stationed on Mindoro, preparing for the invasion of the Japanese
mainland, when he received Brown's contract offer. Groza had impressed
Brown with his placekicking skills before joining the service after his
sophomore year, and soon after signing his contract received two
footballs by mail. Without any goalposts, Groza worked on perfecting his
accuracy, spending hours at a time aiming for a spot at the very top of a
tree. In the Philippines, where Lin Houston's company commander had
to witness his signature, he looked at the contract and said, “Kid, if you
don't sign it, I will. You'll be making more than me, and you're only a
private.” Brown would also court Dante Lavelli, who served nearly three
years with the 28th Infantry Division, where he fought in the Battle of
the Bulge.
Though each player's original freshman class had graduated, Lavelli,
Houston, and Groza—along with Gene Fekete and George Cheroke—all
had college eligibility remaining at Ohio State. It was inevitable that the
players Brown was recruiting would return as much more mature and
less credulous than they'd been as schoolboys. When the news came that
Brown was signing players with college eligibility left, his separation
from Ohio State developed into outright antagonism.
“Ohio State is counting itself exceedingly fortunate in having Paul
Brown eliminate himself from the university picture,” wrote St. John in
a letter published in Ohio State's monthly alumni magazine and reported
in the Cleveland newspapers.

“Keep in mind that I am the same Paul Brown whom they claimed to
have offered $15,000 annually to remain there a year ago,” Brown shot
back a day later. “Maybe the series of events that followed my leaving
might give some insight as to why I really left. St. John is a bitter foe of
pro football and I seem to be in the middle of the two.”
With the Rams’ move to Los Angeles, Brown had the Cleveland market
all to himself. By the middle of the summer, the team was even bearing
his name. An early name-the-team contest had resulted in the club
announcing, in the spring of 1946, that it would be known as the
Cleveland Panthers. But when the owner of a failed minor league
franchise of the ’30s claimed rights to the name, Brown decided to ditch
it. “We don't want to have any association with a loser,” he said,
ultimately agreeing to let the team use the most common name
suggested by the fans, Cleveland Browns.
Brown didn't wait until the players arrived at Bowling Green. His
letter, sent two months prior to the opening day speech, outlined what
they could expect.
“Regardless of how good a friend of mine you might be or how much
of a football name you might have, it means nothing when it comes to
making this football team. To make the squad you must earn the right….
“We will take our football players on the lean and hungry side. Our
team is based on SPEED. I feel certain that you will know what I'm
talking about when we get down to work.”
To help him, he'd assembled a staff of six assistants, the largest in pro
football. The last addition to the staff was Blanton Collier, the veteran
high school coach from Paris, Kentucky, whom Brown had met at Great
Lakes. The two men seemed particularly well suited, with the gentle,
amiable Collier—a classic teacher in the true sense of the word—
bringing just as much intellectual curiosity to the pursuit of coaching as
Brown.
At Bowling Green, the regimen quickly set in: a fire bell rang at 7:00
a.m. to wake the players, breakfast was served at 7:30, practice was at
9:30, lunch at noon, more practice at 3:00 p.m., dinner at 6:15, meetings
to follow after, players in the dormitory at 10:00 p.m., in bed by 10:30.

Brown was hardly the first coach to run organized practices, or to give
chalk talks, or to use film study, or to station men in the press box
during games. But in each of these areas, his attention to detail was
more thorough than anyone else in professional football. And because
he'd carefully selected his players, and paid them well, he had a willing
squad to work with, a group of players more talented to begin with than
any other in the AAFC.
On the third day of practice, Brown installed his first play, an offtackle run. From then through the next three weeks, the schedule
remained the same. In the evening, the team would take notes on a
running play, which would be installed and practiced the next morning.
The afternoon meetings would explain the passing play, which then was
inserted that afternoon. The evening session would review the progress
and assignments of that day, then introduce a new running play to be
installed the next morning.
Brown drew from outside accepted football practices to prepare and
judge his players. From the military, he adapted the army intelligence
test, a twelve-minute, fifty-question multiple-choice examination given
to players at the beginning of training camp. He'd later become the first
coach in pro football to conduct psychological testing, designed to reveal
not raw intelligence but drive, determination, and the ability to sacrifice
for the good of the group. (These early attempts in this area provided
specious results.) Intent on building a fast team, he began timing players
in the 40-yard dash, rather than the 100, reasoning that the 40 was a
more meaningful measure of true football speed, about the distance a
player would cover on a punt.
“There was a total positive attitude in everything Paul did,” recalled
Blanton Collier. “Everything was planned to the minutest detail. For the
first four or five years of the eight I was with him in Cleveland, each
player and coach wrote everything that was in the playbook. I mean, we
sat there and wrote down what he dictated to us. Each coach had to
write out what he was going to teach. Then you dictated that to the
players and they wrote it in longhand. That meant drawing up every
play that went into our system. Nothing was left to chance.”

When the Browns reported to camp in late July, there were no black
players on any AAFC roster. Marion Motley, Brown's star fullback at
Great Lakes, had written a letter to Brown in the spring of 1945, asking
for a tryout, but received a note telling him the team had enough
running backs. Bill Willis, an All-America lineman at Ohio State under
Brown, had written him the previous fall, and Brown said he'd contact
him later. After not hearing from Brown for nearly a year, Willis agreed
to play with the Montreal Alouettes in the Canadian Football League,
though he had not yet signed a contract.
Willis was preparing to leave for Canada when he got a call from Paul
Hor-nung, the Columbus Dispatch sports editor and friend of Brown's,
requesting that he come to the Browns’ camp. “We'll try him at guard
and if he proves that he hasn't lost his old fire and speed, we'll definitely
sign him,” Brown told the Cleveland Press. “He'll do us a lot of good if he
still has it. He was like a black panther when he was playing for me at
Ohio.”
Willis still had it. He reported to camp on August 6 and his impact was
felt instantly. As the Browns began scrimmaging that day, Willis, lined
up just off the shoulder of center Mike “Mo” Scarry, came off the ball so
quickly he consistently reached Graham before the quarterback could
pivot away from center. Scarry charged that Willis was jumping offside,
but after Brown and his assistants kneeled on hands and knees so they
could look straight down the line of scrimmage, they confirmed his
charge was legal.
Later in the month, Brown arranged for Motley to show up at Bowling
Green and “ask” for a tryout. This was another contrivance, as Brown
had asked a friend of his in Canton to contact Motley and drive him to
camp. For the fullback, married and supporting a family of four, it may
have been a last chance at carving out a life outside a steel mill. He
didn't waste it.
Brown later claimed that he had decided, even before Branch Rickey
signed Jackie Robinson to a contract in August 1945, that he wanted
both Willis and Motley on his team, and that he waited until training
camp had already started to summon them to reduce the pressure each
man would face. While his orchestration of their signing was certainly
calculated, his claim seems difficult to square with other facts. As Dan

Daly and Bob O'Donnell relate in The Pro Football Chronicle, Willis was
signed at a time when the Browns had not a single guard with
professional experience, and Motley came to the Browns after fullback
Gene Fekete had been hurt in a scrimmage and another fullback, Ted
Fritsch, had asked to be released so he could return to the Green Bay
Packers. Brown never informed Willis or Motley of his plans, and
because of that came close to losing Willis to the CFL. Years later, Brown
would remark to the writer Mickey Herskowitz that it had been Collier
who was agitating for him to bring in Motley.
Whatever the motivations, the method did result in less scrutiny being
placed on either Willis or Motley—as well as less criticism being directed
at Brown than if he'd taken a more publicly active position, similar to
Rickey's, or even Reeves, who'd announced the signing of Washington
and Strode months earlier.
With the last two key players in camp, the Browns continued to build
toward the regular season in a calm, methodical fashion. Brown had too
many quality players for the thirty-three-man roster. Rather than waive
them to other teams in the AAFC, he devised a secret plan with owner
McBride by which several players who had been cut would land jobs
with the Zone/Yellow Cab Co., with schedules arranged so that they
could report to League Park in Cleveland, where the Browns practiced.
Thus was born the “taxi squad” in pro football.
During the Rams years, Cleveland had gained a reputation as a bad
football town. But the steady drumbeat of publicity that Brown's name
engendered had raised interest to record levels, guaranteeing weeks in
advance that the Browns’ first game would be played in front of the
largest crowd for a regular season game in pro football history.
Less than a year after losing a champion with which they never
developed a bond, Cleveland's fans now seemed prepared to embrace an
untested startup team as their own.
The AAFC season opener was played on a Saturday night, September
5, at Cleveland Stadium, and drew 60,135 fans, nearly equalling the
Rams’ home attendance for the entire 1945 regular season. The fans saw
a smartly dressed Browns team—brown jerseys with orange numerals,
outlined in white block-shadow, white pants, and shiny white helmets—

storm onto the field as the marching band of 120, including bandleader
George “Red” Bird's 30 Marching Majorettes, serenaded them with
brassy music.
The game was covered by Life magazine and other representatives of
the national press, who left duly impressed with the new league and its
marquee team.“About $10,000 worth of fireworks were exploded,”wrote
Jimmy Powers in the New York Daily News. “A leggy chorus of
devastating beauties knocked the customers dizzy with intricate midfield
ballet work that can be compared only to New York's Radio City
Rockettes. A new automobile was given away as a door prize…. A
midget [Tommy Flynn, the team's “Brownie” mascot] led a swing
orchestra through the latest hit parade and two French chefs with white
mushroom hats appeared in the press box and proceeded to carve giant
roasts of beef.”
The game itself was an embarrassing mismatch. Faster, stronger, and
much better prepared, the Browns coasted to a 44–0 victory over the
Miami Sea-hawks.
The Browns outclassed their opposition, rolling through their first six
games by a combined score of 149–20, and it wasn't until their seventh
game, at home against the Los Angeles Dons, that they trailed at
halftime. Motley stormed through the Dons for touchdown runs of 47
and 68 yards in the second half, en route to a 31–14 win. Dons coach
Dudley DeGroot (who the year before had coached the Redskins to the
NFL title game) remarked that Motley was “the greatest I've ever seen. A
fullback that can run that fast when he gets out, and won't be tackled by
only one man, when you have that you have something.”
The Browns had something else: a passing attack more sophisticated
than any other team in the league, and a willingness to throw in any
situation, at a time when many coaches were still adhering to the belief
that teams should never throw within their own 20-yard line, and some
teams still punted or quick-kicked rather than try to advance the ball on
third-and-long. Graham took over the starting quarterback job from Cliff
Lewis after three games, and went on to earn All-League honors as a
rookie. After two losses in the middle of the season, the Browns rolled
through the rest of the regular season schedule without being pressed,
finishing 12-2 and drawing a professional record of 339,962 fans for the

seven regular season home games.
While Graham was the natural team leader at quarterback, the
offensive key to the team was Motley, who forced defenses to bunch up
for the run, leaving them more vulnerable to the pass. On the other side
of the line, Willis was just as dominant, seeming to play the game in a
different gear than other linemen.
During the opening rout of the Seahawks, Miami was as confounded
by Willis's speed as Mo Scarry had been upon Willis's arrival in training
camp. Reports circulated of Willis's quickness, marking the first of
countless occasions in the postwar era in which a black player's
excellence in pro football was attributed to athletic ability. But Willis
was in fact small for the position, at 6-foot-2, 210 pounds; the key to his
rush was his attention to the minutest movements in the center's fingers,
and a series of sluicing swim moves to evade blocks that made him one
of the canniest linemen of his era.
When the Browns traveled to Miami to face the woeful Seahawks later
in the season, Motley and Willis stayed back in Cleveland because of a
Florida state law that prohibited whites and blacks from competing on
the same field. (The Browns routed the Seahawks again, 34–0.) Motley
and Willis encountered racism in virtually every game they played.
“There were times in games when I'd be punched by an opponent after a
play, or called a black S.O.B.,” recalled Willis. “Lou [Groza] and Lou
Rymkus, another lineman, said to me, ‘Don't let anybody excite you. If
there's trouble, tell us. We'll handle it.’ I never had to say anything. We
were in the trenches together and they'd know. And the two would take
care of the guy. It was comforting to have teammates like that, believe
me.”
“That kind of crap went on for two or three years,” said Motley, “until
they found out what kind of players we were. They found out that while
they were calling us ‘niggers,’ I was running for touchdowns and Willis
was knocking the shit out of them. They stopped calling us names and
started to catch up with us.”
The team's organizational innovations didn't end with training camp.
With the largest coaching staff in pro football, Brown could afford to

spare one assistant, Red Conkright, to serve as an advance scout,
traveling on weekends to the game of Cleveland's next opponent.
Conkright's scouting reports were incorporated into the weekly game
plans that Brown distributed to the team. Writing it up and
mimeographing it Tuesday night to be handed out at Wednesday's
meetings, the “Brown News” could run up to twenty-five pages.

While Conkright's analysis was given plenty of weight, Collier's input
frequently was crucial. At Great Lakes, Collier's scouting and game plan
abilities had been instrumental in the team's upset of Notre Dame in
1943. He was equally effective in the pros; after the Browns suffered
their first loss of the 1946 season, a 34–20 defeat at the hands of San
Francisco, Collier devoted extra time to dissecting films from the game.
Two weeks later, when the teams met again in San Francisco, Cleveland
shut down the 49ers and Frankie Albert, 14–7.
Cleveland's practices during the week were the least physical in the
sport. Pro teams typically gave their players Mondays off, but Brown
gave his players Monday and Tuesday off, allowing the staff more time
to review the previous game and assemble the scouting report for the
next opponent. Wednesdays and Saturdays called for short run-throughs.
Thursday and Friday were the busiest days, with extensive film study
and game plan meetings in the morning, and practices in the afternoon.
Each practice—scheduled at 1:00 p.m. to coincide with kickoff times on
Sunday—began with tackling drills, but no other significant physical
contact. “A coach who scrimmages doesn't know how to teach,” Brown
said, keenly aware that virtually every other coach in the game
scrimmaged at least once a week during the season.
As in training camp, Brown attempted to cast his influence far beyond
the field. “Paul was the one who originated the Tuesday rule,” said Otto
Graham. “No sex with your wives after Tuesday night…. ‘Save yourself
for the game,’ he'd tell us. We kidded about that. I guess it shows the
morality of that time. Paul didn't recognize that sex existed outside the
marriage. I kept asking him, ‘What about the single men?’ and Paul
never answered.”
During the season, the night before home games, he brought the
Browns together in the Hotel Carter. The team would eat dinner
together, then attend a movie before returning to the hotel for the night,

with a kiss good night to wives and girlfriends (invited to the movies,
but excluded from the dinner) in the Carter lobby. On the road, Brown
followed the same procedure, and discouraged sightseeing. “This is a
business trip, nothing more, nothing less,” he said.
On game days, the team was rested and focused, having been spared
any rigorous physical contact during the week, and after spending much
of the last twenty-four hours before kickoff together. The pregame
speeches were terse and usually dispassionate. Brown might say, “Say
your prayers, and let's get going,” and leave it at that.

The first AAFC championship game, played against Dan Topping's New
York Yankees (who had been renamed after bolting from the NFL after
the 1945 season), would prove another example, as if one were needed,
of Brown's absolute authority.
After the team returned from its regular-season-ending 66–14 win at
Brooklyn, lineman and team captain Jim Daniell hit the town with Lou
Rymkus and Mac Speedie. Pulling up behind a police car, Daniell laid on
the horn in an attempt to have the officer move. When the officer got
out of his car to investigate, the ensuing confrontation landed the
belligerent Daniell at the station, on a drunk-and-disorderly charge. The
next morning, as the team gathered in the locker room after practice,
Brown confronted Daniell in front of the team.
“Is what I read in the paper true?” Brown asked. Daniell confirmed
that it was.
“Fine,” said Brown. “Turn in your suit.”
“Don't you want to hear my side of the story?” asked Daniell.
“No, you're through.”
Daniell was kicked off the team less than forty-eight hours before the
AAFC championship game. Rymkus and Speedie, both key starters, were
let off with a stern warning.
“We were a young team and Paul had us in the palm of his hand after
that,” Otto Graham later explained. “We thought, if he could do that to
Jim Daniell, he'd do it to anyone. Daniell's backup was a lineman who
was just about as good as Jim. But I didn't realize that until later. What

Paul did was get a message across to us, and not hurt the team, either.
For years, veteran players told rookies about the day Paul Brown cut Jim
Daniell, and that just made him even bigger and more powerful in the
eyes of the young players.”

The game itself was a tightly fought contest, with the Yankees, though
out-gained 315 yards to 146, laboring heroically, to lead 3–0 after a
quarter and 9–7 at the end of the third period, before Graham led the
Browns on the game-winning drive late in the fourth quarter. At the end
of the game, with the 40,000 in attendance storming the field, Brown's
players lifted their coach to their shoulders and marched him into the
locker room. His players’ winning shares were $931.57, with the
deposed Daniell voted a full share.
Afterward, Brown seemed more relieved than thrilled, remarking,“It
was a long afternoon.” But he was satisfied with his first year of
professional football, and not reluctant to discuss the implications. “For
the players’ sake, too,” he said, “I'm tickled with that victory. But my
satisfaction is in proving that the same ideas and ideals that won in high
school and college can win, too, in pro ball. That makes me happy.”
One more important element of the game would change under Brown
in that first year. Prior to 1946, it was common for head coaches and
their assistants to take four to six months away from football, working
off-season jobs in the winter and spring. Brown was convinced that if he
could pay his assistants enough to work year-round, as they did at the
largest college programs (where recruiting made it a necessity), there
was an edge to be gained in doing so.
After the season, Blanton Collier headed home to his house in
Kentucky with films from all fifteen games of the 1946 season, a handcrank projector and a special viewer that would allow him to magnify
part of the picture and examine a single player on the film one frame at
a time. Squirreling himself away for long days and evenings in an
upstairs room in the family's home, Collier examined every Cleveland
player's performance on every play of the previous season.
Collier's job was twofold. First, he would combine the grades of each
player on each play to come up with a percentage of made and missed
assignments—he and Brown determined that a player needed to

complete his assignment at least 80 percent of the time to be successful.
The second was the grand analysis that Brown had dreamed of, and
that Collier executed. By cataloguing each play the team called, Brown
and Collier could see how a particular play had done over the course of
the season.
One example: The team's “24” play, an off-tackle slant with the left
halfback, was run 27 times during the 1946 season, gaining a total of
102 yards, or 3.77 yards per carry. Three of the plays resulted in
touchdowns. On the reasoning that a perfectly executed play should
always result in a touchdown, the other 24 were considered failures.
Collier's careful analysis revealed the reasons for each instance in which
the play didn't result in a score (“Four times when the left tackle made a
poor block on the opponents’ right tackle…. Once when the left halfback
hit the hole too wide”).
The results, compiled in a thick report that Collier submitted to Brown
late in the spring of 1947, was the most extensive performance analysis
done in the history of football to that date, and it gave the Browns a
secret window to their own offensive personality. Brown, suitably proud
of the report, referred to it as his “flaw-finder.”
And in the zero-sum world of football coaching, the flaw-finder and
the information it revealed was a key component in keeping the Browns
ahead of the crowd. During the 1947 and 1948 seasons, the team would
lose just one game, in the process winning two more league titles.
As in every other industry, the methods that were the most successful in
football were widely copied. “When everyone else had two assistants in
’46, he had six,” said Lou Spadia, the vice president of the 49ers. “And
so in ’47, everyone else had six. No one ever put their team up at a hotel
the night before a home game. Shit, he does it and now everyone else
has to do it.”
By 1948, Brown had become the most influential coach in America.
His annual coaching clinic in Cleveland was attended by more than
2,000 coaches, and his speeches to this group amounted to a football
manifesto.

“You must earn morale, you can't make it or develop it,” said Brown.
“Morale comes from the coach. You must be an all-out person. You have
to love the game, show interest in it, work hard at it. You have to feel it;
it has to come from the heart. Your wife should support you, and she
should be concerned about how much time you put in on it. I compare it
to the commitment that is made when a person decides to become a
priest. You have to be a football crackpot; there are no shortcuts.”
In the audience, a group of football crackpots looked on, assiduously
taking notes, spreading the Brown philosophy. Though the AAFC's future
was murky, the success of Paul Brown was guaranteed. He had recast
football in his image.
Brown's words at that first training camp—about wanting to be the
most amateur team in professional football—would be oft-quoted. What
he'd accomplished, though, was in some ways the opposite. With
precious few pep talks or appeals to emotion, he had taken a game
dominated by near-amateurs, and instilled it with a sophisticated,
professional air. Or as he himself would put it in a less guarded moment,
“We're getting the guesswork out of football. We're making a science out
of what is called a game.”

3 “Let Bert Do It”

In their time of crisis, confronted with the specter of Arch Ward, Paul
Brown, and an AAFC bankrolled by multimillionaires, the NFL owners
had selected as their new commissioner a cash-poor blueblood who had
been, arguably, the worst head coach in league history, mustering just
10 wins in five-plus seasons.
But what the owners were looking for in 1946 wasn't a celebrity
figurehead or a polished boardroom presence or a proven winner with
an aura of genius. They instead sought a fighter, someone who didn't
need to be sold on the virtues of their sport, or briefed on the intricacies
of its problems. And in the indefatigable presence of Bert Bell, they
found their beacon of hope, a man whose unquenchable love for football
was so close to blind adoration as to make no difference. “His mission in
life was football,” said George Halas. “He had a sure instinct for
conducting the business of the game.”
Bell still bore vestiges of his old self, the playboy raconteur of the ’20s
with slicked-back hair, by now silver, and an estimable paunch, neatly
draped in blue serge suits during the fall and winter, and tan gabardine
in the summer. His voice was a thing of wonder, a deep, growling
baritone that projected through office walls and over static-filled phone
lines. He was a voluble man of motion, generally heard before seen. And
he was what pro football needed most at the time: a true believer.
His hiring came at a critical moment, and not only because of the
challenge of the AAFC. The league was in danger of imploding, beset by
factional rivalries and legislative paralysis, a result of ten strong-willed

men, each with definite ideas about why their beloved sport was losing
so much money.
Even worse than the yelling and arguing were the intractable, souldeadening stalemates, when long stretches of time went by in which
nothing was said, when the only sound in the room was two or more
men fuming. While numerous gatherings deteriorated to these standoffs,
the league's annual meetings were particularly brutal because they
involved the perennial exercise in argumentation, the drawing up of the
coming season's schedule.
The schedule itself—the selection of opponents and the sequence of
games—was a crucial element in each team's home game ticket sales,
which in turn were the single most important revenue source for each
club. So from the earliest days of the league, owners devoted days and
days to obdurate, petulant haggling over the competing claims on the
coming season's schedule.
With the ten-team league separated into two divisions in 1933, the
only definitive rules were those that stipulated that every team should
play a home-and-home series against every other team within its
division. But that would account for just eight of each team's twelve
games. Beyond that, every owner wanted his own advantage; every team
in the East wanted the Bears to visit; every team in the West wanted the
Redskins to visit. And each team wanted to go on the road to play teams
that drew well, because visiting teams got a 40 percent share of the gate,
after allowing for stadium rental.
This issue was, in a real sense, why a league office was needed in the
first place: an impartial arbiter to determine qualifications, league
games, rules, procedures, and, when possible, to help generate publicity
on behalf of the entire enterprise. In theory, it was the league's job to
mediate these disputes and find equitable solutions to problems such as
the schedule. In reality, Layden and Joe Carr before him had found this
difficult, if not impossible, to do.
“The owners who had the staying power were the ones who came
away with the decent schedules,” said Art Rooney. “The guys who snuck
out to get some sleep or go night-clubbing wound up getting murdered
the next season because when they weren't there to defend themselves,

we'd give them all the dates we didn't want.” Even those who stuck
around to fight often felt victimized by cronyism and the perception that
the oldest franchises looked out for themselves to the exclusion of
others.

So owners learned to dread the annual meetings, and the battles that
would invariably follow. Minutes from meetings in the ’40s often
included the shorthand euphemism, “There was a general and lengthy
discussion on the problems of the game schedule.” Entire sessions might
consist of this notation alone. Or, from the 1948 meeting, a notation that
beginning with the evening of January 15,“discussion on the schedule
took place from 3:50 to 7 PM, 8 PM to 2 AM, 10:45 AM to 1:45 PM and
2:55 to 6 PM.”On one occasion, after three days of debate resulted in a
schedule finally being placed in its entirety on a chalkboard, the
Redskins’ George Preston Marshall—angry that he hadn't gotten either of
the swing home games he coveted—walked up to the chalkboard and
quickly erased the entire chart, eliciting curses and howls, since no one
at the meeting had yet committed the schedule to paper.
It was hoped that the well-liked Bell could bring some equanimity to
the proceedings, but both the 1946 and 1947 meetings deteriorated into
the usual protracted discussions, in which nothing was settled.
Wellington Mara, son of Giants owner Tim Mara, was just then getting
his first taste of league meetings. “The schedules would always take
several days and Bert always found time to be politic,” said Mara. “All
the clubs were very jealous of the schedules and no one trusted anyone.
After a while, people started walking out of the league meetings and
saying, ‘Let Bert do it.’ ”
And for the next dozen seasons, Bell did.
Though he endeavored to meet each team's specific needs, his
scheduling was guided by an overall philosophy. “Weak teams should
play other weak teams while the strong teams are playing other strong
teams early in the year,” he once explained. “It's the only way to keep
more teams in contention longer into the season.” That his intent was to
help teams at the box office was undeniable. But the function of Bell's
machinations was to make the league more competitive, and to keep
more teams in the race longer into the season.

Each off-season, Bell would devote himself to this task, often to the
exclusion of all others, and spend hundreds of hours fashioning dozens
of different prospective schedules, while juggling the various
commitments, requests, blackout dates, and other variables. Sitting at his
dining room table, he worked with a huge cardboard placard, laid out in
a grid fashion, with team names running along the top and game dates
running down the side. Next to the board would be dozens of dominoes,
borrowed from his sons, Bert Jr. and Upton, each with a team name
Scotch-taped on the back, along with several books of paper matches.
When Bell wanted Philadelphia to play at Washington on a certain date,
he'd find the date on the left-hand side of the board, and on that line
he'd place a domino with Philadelphia's name on it into the two-inchsquare box below Washington's heading. On the same line, he'd then
place a match into the box under Philadelphia's heading, to indicate the
Eagles had been assigned a road game that week.
For weeks on end, Bell would fill out numerous schedules in this
fashion, drinking coffee and sipping grape juice, breaking only for dinner
at seven and, later on, his nightly constitutional to Davis’ Drugstore a
few blocks away in downtown Narberth, the Philadelphia suburb where
he lived. Armed with a small container of chocolate ice cream, he would
return to his schedules and work late into the night, taking phone calls
with a long extension cord, copying off possible schedules on smaller
pieces of cardboard when he was finished. He would then weigh each
against the others, noting minor adjustments among the countless
different combinations, before presenting one or more to the assembled
owners.
There were other factors besides the schedule that contributed to the
change, but Bell's intention of keeping the league more balanced was
soon realized. From 1937 to 1946, the Packers and Bears from the
Western Division and the Giants and Redskins from the Eastern took
nineteen of the twenty spots in the NFL championship game. Beginning
with 1947, that would change, with even longtime doormats like the
Eagles and Cardinals rising to the top. As caretaker of and ambassador
for the game, Bell quickly developed a mind-set in which the league was
only as healthy as its weakest team. His son Upton would recall him
returning home after Sunday games and proudly calling upstairs to his

wife, Frances, “Mother, guess what? It's week four, and they're all still in
the race.”
Those in Bell's social circle had expected different, grander things. He
was the squire of a Philadelphia Main Line family whose father, John
Cromwell Bell, was among the most prominent lawyers in the
Philadelphia area, and the Pennsylvania state attorney general from
1911 to 1915. The elder Bell, who played football at Penn in the 1880s,
was chairman of the school's athletic council, was second in seniority to
Walter Camp on college football's seminal Football Rules Committee,
whose reforms saved the sport in 1906.
De Benneville Bell was born February 25, 1895; because there were
many “De Benneville Bertrams” in his lineage, he was known as “Bert”
from an early age. “If you don't think I had to fight to get people to call
me ‘Bert,’ ” he told one reporter, “then I must have dreamed all those
schoolyard battles.” He grew up muscular and affable, and by all
accounts unspoiled by this luxurious upbringing. Bert starred in football,
baseball, and basketball at the Haverford School outside of Philadelphia,
but when speculation rose about him going to one of the emerging
football powers outside the state, his father immediately and publicly
quashed it. “He'll go to Penn,” John C. Bell told a newspaper reporter,
“or he'll go to hell.” Bell indeed went to Penn in 1914, majoring in
English and playing football for three years as quarterback. In 1916,
Penn went 7-2-1 and accepted a bid to the Rose Bowl. Bell started at
quarterback in the game, January 1, 1917, where unbeaten Oregon
prevailed, 14–0. After a two-year stint with an army medical unit in
France, he returned to captain Penn's football team in 1919, graduated
in 1920, and returned that fall as an assistant for Penn head coach John
Heisman, where he remained on staff through 1928.
Though he worked nominally as a stockbroker during the ’20s, Bell
spent the decade living a life not unlike the romanticized cinematic
visions of the ’20s, frequenting nightclubs, dancehalls, and speakeasies,
tooling around town in a cherry-red Marmon roadster and a coonskin
coat, playing with equal vigor the stock market, the gambling halls, and
the horses, devoting the month of August to the summer season at
Saratoga. On summer Saturdays in Chelsea, when his father would leave
for Philadelphia to attend church services the following morning, Bert

Bell would often throw a party, hosting his eclectic assemblage of friends
—ranging from entertainers like Bob Hope and Cesar Romero to bluecollar acquaintances from the resort town.
After a series of financial setbacks, Bell was working for his father,
managing the Ritz-Carlton Hotel on Broad Street. It was there he met the
musical comedy actress and former Ziegfeld dancer Frances Upton, a
sweet, vivacious dazzler with a dramatic streak and a staunch moral
fiber, a perfectly complicated Catholic beauty of the modern age.
Between starring roles in such Broadway hits as Whoopee!, with Eddie
Cantor, Frances Upton often performed sets at the Ritz's small, swanky
rooftop lounge. Doting on Frances, the smitten Bell would wait until she
finished her performance, then escort her to a nearby Catholic church
where a mass was held at two in the morning for late-shift printers and
newspaper workers. While the daily communicant Frances went inside,
Bert remained outside on the street, reading the paper, joshing with the
police officers, and watching the nightlife. One summer night when Bert
professed his undying love to Frances, she told him she could never
marry a drinking man. Surrounded by friends, he ordered one last drink
and downed it, then vowed to her he would never touch alcohol again.
By all accounts, he didn't; they were married January 4, 1934.
The previous summer, Bell had borrowed $2,500 from his fiancée and,
along with his former Penn teammate Lud Wray, headed a syndicate that
bought the NFL's defunct Frankford Yellow Jackets franchise, a pro
power in the ’20s that had gone bankrupt during the 1931 season.
Renaming the team the Eagles, after the eagle logo on the National
Recovery Administration's em blem (“We Do Our Part”), Bell and Wray
took over the club and rejoined the NFL for the 1933 season.
It was clear from the day he bought the Eagles that Bert Bell had
found his calling, and in the coming years he would serve as owner,
coach, trainer, general manager, ticket-taker, and janitor. Walking along
the Jersey shore during their honeymoon, Frances looked up to the clear
night sky and said to Bert, “Gee, look at the moon.” He gazed up at the
night sky and smiled. “Frances,” he said, “I only wish I had a punter who
could kick that high.”
The Eagles were not immediately embraced by the city. Even though
his playing costs were modest—Bell paid some players as little as $15

per game— stadium rentals were steep, the team drew poorly, and the
losses were alarming. Over their first three seasons, the Eagles lost more
than $80,000 and the partnership went bankrupt after the 1935 season.
When the team was put up for auction in 1936, Bell was the only bidder,
buying out his partners for $4,500, and installing himself to replace
Wray as head coach. By that time, Bell had already made a lasting
contribution to pro football.
After two seasons with the Eagles, it had become apparent to Bell that
the league was becoming dangerously stratified. The three perennial
contenders— the Bears, Packers, and Giants—were the only clubs that
flirted with profitability, while the remainder of clubs were rarely in
contention and suffered heavy losses. The best players coming out of
college were, naturally, more inclined to sign with teams where their
earning power and chances of success were high.
Bell had been particularly discouraged by his fruitless efforts to sign
Stan “King Kong” Kostka, a brawny fullback who'd transferred from
Oregon to Minnesota in time to play for the Gophers’ first national
championship team in 1934. After contacting Kostka by phone, Bell took
a train from Philadelphia to Minneapolis, and they met in the lobby of a
hotel. Kostka said the best offer he'd received from another team was
$3,500, and Bell offered $4,000. Hedging, Kostka said he wanted an
hour to consider it. When they met later, Kostka was still noncommittal.
After Bell increased his offer to $6,000, Kostka still balked, and after
further flirtations later signed with the NFL's Brooklyn Dodgers. Bell
returned to Philadelphia discouraged, and convinced the whole system
needed to be fixed. “I made up my mind that this league would never
survive unless we had some system whereby each team had an even
chance to bid for talent against the other,” said Bell.
His reasoning led to the radical proposal he floated the following
spring, during the league meetings of 1935. “Gentlemen, I've always had
the theory that pro football is like a chain,” he told his fellow owners.
“The league is no stronger than its weakest link—and I've been a weak
link for so long that I should know. Every year the rich get richer and
the poor get poorer.” Bell suggested that the dominance of the Giants,
Bears, and Packers meant that the league's other teams were at a
functional disadvantage in recruiting new players. “Here's what I

propose,” he said. “At the end of each football season, I suggest that we
pool the names of all eligible college seniors. Then we make our
selections in inverse order of the standings—that is, the lowest-ranked
team picks first. We do this round after round until we have exhausted
the supply of college players.”

There's no record that Bell used the word “draft” in this proposal, but
when the motion was approved, reporters quickly called a spade a spade,
and the NFL draft was born. The Bears and Giants, who had played in
both of the league's first two scheduled title games in 1933 and 1934,
had the most to lose from such an arrangement. But both Halas and Tim
Mara went along with it. “People come to see a competition,” Mara
explained. “We could give them a competition only if the teams had
some sort of equality, if the teams went up and down with the fortunes
of life. Of course, that meant that no team would in the future win a
championship every third year and people would start saying, ‘What's
happened to the Giants? They aren't the team they used to be.’ That was
a hazard we had to accept for the benefit of the league, of professional
football and everyone in it.”
The Eagles went 2-9 in 1935, earning Bell and the Eagles the dubious
right to select first in the league's first “annual selection meeting,” held
February 8, 1936, at the Ritz-Carlton in Philadelphia. Bell selected
Chicago halfback Jay Berwanger, winner of the inaugural DAC Trophy,
presented by the Downtown Athletic Club of New York City to the best
player east of the Mississippi. (A year later, after the death of Bell's
former coach, DAC director John Heisman, the trophy was renamed the
Heisman Trophy, and players across the country became eligible.) But
Berwanger chose not to turn pro and, in fact, the Eagles were unable to
sign any of their nine selections in that first draft.
Though it would take at least a decade before scouting systems
became sophisticated enough to have any success at reliably identifying
pro prospects, Bell's concept was a crucial element in equalizing talent
and competition throughout the league. He was not to profit, however,
from his own innovation. Starting with his first season as sole owner and
head coach in 1936, Bell's Eagles finished fifth, fifth, fourth, fourth, and
fifth in the five-team Eastern Division.

In the face of these persistent failures, his enthusiasm never wavered.
He'd beat the streets, often buttonholing fellow members outside
Philadelphia's Racquet Club, or leaving a packet of tickets behind the bar
at Lew Tendler's Saloon, close to the Ritz. He'd even been known to
stand on an island in the middle of rush-hour traffic on Broad Street to
hawk tickets at passing cars. But the losses mounted, and by the end of
the 1940 season Bell was in another financial crisis. “Bert was a guy that
just squandered his money,” said one family friend. “I mean he was a
good person and he wasn't out drinking or doing any of that kind of
stuff. But he just didn't have control of his money.”
The Steelers’ Art Rooney would bail him out of his crisis, through a
complex series of procedures. First Rooney sold the Steelers to New York
millionaire Alexis Thompson, then put up a stake to buy a half-interest
in the Eagles. Then, Rooney and Bell swapped franchises with
Thompson, along with the players themselves. Historian Bob Carroll,
founder of the Professional Football Researchers Association,
summarized it thusly: “Bert and Art brought the Eagles to Pittsburgh and
renamed them the ‘Steelers.’ Meanwhile, Thompson took the Steelers to
Philadelphia and renamed them ‘Eagles.’ Most of the former Philadelphia
players wound up in Pittsburgh and [vice versa]. As late as 1945 the
Steelers were officially owned by the Philadelphia Football Club, Inc….
Just about everybody ignores the technically correct descent, and it's
probably best that they do. I mean, how convoluted do you want your
pro football history to be?”
Asked about the deal years later, Art Rooney could only throw up his
hands. “Things were different then,” he said. “Money was tough to come
by.”
So in 1941, Bell and Rooney were running the Steelers, with Rooney
serving as general manager and Bell coaching yet again. A picture from
the period shows Bell, proudly standing on the field, in a fedora and Tshirt, “Pittsburgh Steelers Football Club” neatly stenciled across the
chest, whistle around his neck, two-tone buckskin shoes peeking out
beneath khaki slacks. After beginning the 1941 season with an 0-2
record, a morose Bell returned to Pittsburgh and suggested to Rooney
that the team make some deals.
“People in Pittsburgh are tired of our deals,” said Rooney, chomping

his ever-present cigar. “They always backfire.”
“What do you think we should do?” asked Bell.
“Bert,” said Rooney, “did you ever think about changing coaches?”
Bell heeded his friend's advice and retired from coaching for good,
moving to the Steelers’ front office, where he and Rooney would soldier
on through World War II. Combined with his ignominious five years in
Philadelphia, Bell compiled a 10-46-2 record in the NFL. His. 190
winning percentage is the worst in NFL history among coaches with five
seasons or more experience.
When the war ended and the time came to replace Layden, Bell was
the insider who was quickly chosen. “Those guys—Halas, Marshall, Bell,
Rooney, Mara, Bidwill—those six pretty much were the guys that ran the
show,” said Dan Rooney, who grew up watching his father's enduring
friendship with Bell. “And so when they were ready to make a change,
they just came to the conclusion that Bert could do it. Bert could go back
to Philadelphia and run the league. And it was an obvious choice from
the standpoint of what they wanted to do: make one of their own, who
could become available, the commissioner. I mean, you know, Halas
couldn't become available, Marshall couldn't become available. Bert was
one who could.”
“Pro football has growing pains,” wrote John Lardner in Newsweek in
1945. “The end of the war may be the event which will build the sport
into national proportions both geographically and commercially, just as
the end of the last war gave pro players their original impetus and made
them begin to think of organization and respectability.” In this, Lardner
proved prophetic. The country was mobilizing for a series of broad social
changes each of which, in its own way, would benefit pro football.
More than 16 million Americans had joined the armed forces during
World War II, and 12 million of them—about two thirds of all American
men between the ages of eighteen and thirty-four—were still in uniform
when the war concluded in August of 1945. Within a year, nine million
of them had moved to civilian life. Many would take part in the GI Bill
of Rights, signed in 1944, which in addition to providing aid for housing
and business start-ups, provided returning vets with monthly stipends to
cover educational expenses. When the program ended in 1945, nearly

two million had gone to college with GI Bill assistance. Almost 500,000
Americans graduated from colleges in 1950, compared to 216,500 in
1940. That sweeping change affected campus life and campus athletics,
and it surely affected the quality and quantity of football players eligible
for the NFL's draft.
Salaries increased sharply in pro football and, for the first time, there
was something of a decent living to be made. Even pedestrian players
returning from the war in 1945 made more than the annual per capita
disposable income in current dollars of $1,074.
Television research, which had been virtually suspended with the
beginning of American involvement in World War II, was again a toppriority issue for businesses, and sales in the U.S. would increase
exponentially in the years ahead. The effects of the baby boom would
solidify the growth of spectator sports in the ’60s and ’70s, but even in
the late ’40s, it was clear that Americans were going to have more free
time and more spending money. By the end of the decade, the U.S.
accounted for 7 percent of the world's population and 42 percent of its
income.
With this postwar prosperity as a backdrop, and a nation embracing its
pastimes in a return to normal, the NFL's and AAFC's “war between the
leagues” was a big story. From the moment he assumed office, Bell was
prepared to fight. And he did so initially by refusing to discuss the
challengers. Upon taking the job in January 1946, he said, “Sure I
recognize there's a rival professional league in operation, trying to take
our players and buck us at the gate. But I expect to be so busy with the
affairs of the National League that I will have no time to think about the
other circuit.” He moved the league offices from Chicago, where Layden
was based, to New York and, after wearying of the daily commute, in
1948 to Philadelphia, first to a spot near the University of Pennsylvania
campus, then to Center City Philadelphia, in an office building at 1518
Walnut Street.
The challenge of the AAFC was as formidable as expected. Arch Ward's
league was an unusual upstart, because it brought so many advantages
that rival leagues in the past hadn't enjoyed: by the end of 1946, Paul

Brown was probably the best-known pro football coach in America and
his organization was justly celebrated; Ward's role in the formation of
the league and his influence throughout the country meant that the new
league would have little trouble getting press.

The AAFC possessed a roster of owners who were much wealthier than
their NFL counterparts. The new league had real estate magnates like
Mickey McBride, Anthony J. Morabito in San Francisco, with vast
holdings in the lumber business, trucking company owner John L.
Keeshin in Chicago, and the Los Angeles syndicate fronted by Don
Ameche, MGM head Louis B. Mayer, and Benjamin Lindheimer, a
millionaire sportsman who owned horse tracks. Arrayed against those
forces, the NFL could offer only stability and tradition. The league's
decision to continue operating during the lean days of World War II thus
proved crucial. Had it suspended operations during the war, then tried to
resume on equal footing with the AAFC in 1946, the war between the
leagues might have been much more of a toss-up.
As it was, the NFL was more popular than ever in 1946. With the
lifting of travel restrictions, it resumed its barnstorming exhibition
schedule, with the Redskins opening in Los Angeles, playing in front of
68,188 at the first Los Angeles Times Charity Game, and playing games
across the Southeast. The league broke its all-time attendance record in
the regular season, averaging more than 31,000 per regular season
game.
But for all the success at the box office, the season was less successful
in the public perception. The AAFC took its share of headlines, with Paul
Brown and the Cleveland Browns featured in virtually every magazine in
the country that covered sports, including Time, Life, and Newsweek. The
College All-Star Game, the annual exhibition opener between the
defending NFL champion and a squad of college stars, took on a different
meaning with the Ward-orchestrated AAFC challenge to the NFL. Many
NFL owners were convinced that AAFC teams were offering an invitation
to the All-Star Game for those who signed with the new league, which
helped to explain why forty-four of the sixty All-Stars were headed to the
new league. Harder to explain was the final score, a 16–0 win for the
All-Stars over the Los Angeles Rams.
But the greatest crisis was an internal one. The 1946 campaign found

the Giants and Bears back on top of their respective divisions. Midway
through the season, New York shut out Chicago, 14–0, in a
championship preview, then coasted to the Eastern Conference title. Yet
the week before the title game, on the streets in New York, it was the
Bears who were installed as 10-point favorites over the Giants. This
raised the suspicion of New York detectives, who eventually uncovered
an attempt to fix the 1946 NFL championship game.
Back in Philadelphia on the eve of the game, Bell received a late-night
call from New York mayor William O'Dwyer, who had called Giants
running back Merle Hapes and quarterback Frank Filchock to Gracie
Mansion, where he and city detectives interrogated them. Filchock
insisted he hadn't heard a word about a proposed fix, while Hapes
admitted to the bribe attempt, from Sidney Paris, a convicted felon
who'd served four years for mail fraud, and had joined a group of Giants
boosters at an Elks Lodge gathering in New York City in late November.
Paris had spent the intervening weeks befriending Hapes and Filchock,
taking them out to the Copacabana, buying them drinks, offering them
jobs in the off-season, then had proposed, a week earlier, that each man
could become rich by making sure that the Giants lost by at least 10
points in the title game. Faced with that evidence, and with just hours to
go before the game, Bell suspended Hapes but agreed to let Filchock
play.
Under suspicion still, Filchock played valiantly the next day and
though he threw six interceptions in the 24–14 loss, few questioned that
he had tried his best. But in subsequent months, as the case went to
court, Filchock later ad mitted that he had been approached by gamblers
as well. It would turn out that while both players turned down Paris's
proposals, neither reported the case to the league, leaving the impression
in the informed circles of underworld gambling that the fix was in. Bell
suspended both players indefinitely.
At the January 1947 meetings, owners gave the commissioner the
latitude to suspend for life any player or team official involved in a
game-fixing attempt. Hapes and Filchock were suspended indefinitely;
Hapes, reinstated in 1954, never played in the NFL again, while
Filchock, reinstated in 1950, threw three passes for the Baltimore Colts
that season and retired.

Bell's action was decisive and crucial to public confidence. Coming on
the heels of the Brooklyn basketball point-shaving incident, in an era
when corruption was widespread in boxing, and the 1919 Black Sox
World Series scandal had occurred in most fans’ lifetimes, the threat of
game fixing was pervasive and severe.

Bell was convinced that the league needed to do more. In announcing
the Hapes and Filchock suspensions in April 1947, he stated,
“Professional football cannot continue to exist unless it is based upon
absolute honesty. The players must be not only absolutely honest; they
must be above suspicion. In short, the game and its players must be kept
free from corruption, from all bribes and offers of bribes and from any
possible ‘fixing’ of games.” Two months later, Bell announced that with
the beginning of the 1947 season, the league would publish in advance
of each game a list of players who were injured and would be unable or
unlikely to play. (This would be the precursor to the detailed injury lists
that would become a staple of midweek agate type in the ’70s.) With the
move, Bell struck a blow for fairness and open information and also,
paradoxically, made the first in a series of moves that would increase
betting interest in and gambling on pro football. It was certainly in the
NFL's interests to guarantee the public that the game was honest and
conducted fairly, and distributing names of injured players furthered
that cause. But it also gave those inclined to bet more information with
which to place their wager as well as greater confidence that they were
betting on an honest competition.
Bell was hardly a prude about gambling. A good deal of the money
that built the league had come from it—Tim Mara had been a
bookmaker on the lawn at Saratoga, Art Rooney owned a horse track
and was a skilled horse player (faithfully reporting his winnings to the
IRS), and the Bidwills owned a track, and made a fortune in the printing
of pari-mutuel tickets. Bell's philosophy was distinctly not one of
pretending that gambling didn't exist, but rather that it must be
monitored by the league. His preoccupation was that people, whether
they gambled or not, be reassured that the game was clean and beyond
reproach.
Having won for the time being a battle for public confidence in the
honesty of the game, Bell and the league returned their attention in

1947 to the war of attrition with the AAFC. With salaries skyrocketing in
1946 and 1947, it seemed that deeper pockets might be decisive. The
only teams to show a profit in 1946 were the two league champions, the
Browns in the AAFC (showing a profit of $10,553.89) and Halas's Bears.
The AAFC owners were prepared to lose money, and they did. In that
inaugural 1946 season, the San Francisco 49ers lost $51,000. Franchises
in New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles—fighting in markets with
established NFL teams—each suffered greater losses. For all that, the
league was developing a following, not just in Cleveland, but in Buffalo,
Los Angeles (where the Dons initially outdrew the Rams on the strength
of star Glen Dobbs and a better record), and San Francisco, where the
49ers were playing an exciting brand of football, with former Stanford
quarterback Frankie Albert leading Buck Shaw's slick T formation attack.
Ye t Bell's strategy remained the same. When private overtures were
made by Ben Lindheimer for the leagues to meet after the 1946 season,
Bell declined to meet. Publicly, as well, he refused to recognize the
league in any meaningful way. When asked about the AAFC, his
standard answer was, “No comment.” When the annual Pro Football
Illustrated— a picture-filled staple of concession stands throughout the
league—chose to preview both the NFL and the AAFC in 1947, the
publication was banned from NFL stadiums.
The AAFC owners would realize that the NFL's owners were more
resilient than they had hoped. Though the teams in Brooklyn and New
York had hurt the Giants, neither could gain a foothold of its own. The
Chicago Rockets were doomed in what became the three-team market of
Chicago, especially when the Cardinals rose up to win the NFL title in
1947 and advance to the title game again in 1948. At one point that
season, the increasingly desperate Arch Ward requested a private
meeting with Brown and asked him to “send” Otto Graham to the
Rockets for the good of the league, reasoning that the quarterback,
raised in nearby Waukegan, would be a boon to the Rockets’ woeful
attendance. This elicited a predictable response. Ward biographer
Thomas B. Littlewood wrote that “the coach fixed the sports editor in his
cold stare, issued an emphatic ‘no,’ and that was the last of that.”
Throughout the 1947 and 1948 seasons, as losses continued to mount
in both leagues, there was some back-channel communication. By the

beginning of 1949, columnist Stanley Woodward noted that the AAFC
was “being held together principally by Ward's skill and generosity in
spending other people's money.”
But the real problem was more fundamental—a lack of competition
had dampened interest in the AAFC in every city. Cleveland had been
the dominant team in the AAFC from day one, and their superiority was
becoming so accepted, it began to hurt the gate throughout the league.
After dropping a game to the Los Angeles Dons on October 12, 1947, the
Browns went nearly two years without another loss, winning the title
with a 12-1-1 record in 1947, sweeping through the 1948 schedule at
14-0, then beginning the 1949 season at 4-0-1 before the 49ers
ambushed them in San Francisco, 56–28, on October 2, 1949.
Browns players from that era would long remember their coach's
speech after the streak finally ended with the loss to the 49ers.
Returning to their hotel in Los Angeles, where they'd remain for another
week to play the Dons, some expected Brown would be conciliatory.
They soon found out otherwise. “There's a bus outside waiting to take
you through the movie studios,” he announced to the team. “Have fun. I
don't see how you can. Not after the way you played against San
Francisco. I'm telling you this and it's cold turkey. If those of you who
fell down on the job don't bounce back against Los Angeles, I'll get rid of
you. I mean that exactly. I don't care who you are, or how important you
may be. I'll get rid of you. If anyone thinks I'm kidding—just try me.
That's all.”
The speech was successful both in the short term (no players joined
the studio tour) and in the long term (the Browns routed the Dons, 61–
14, the next weekend and didn't lose again en route to their fourth
straight AAFC title).
By this time, many in the press were speculating about the Browns
“wrecking the league” with their persistent excellence. By that 1949
season, even the Cleveland fans were growing bored. After setting pro
attendance records in 1946 (averaging 48,556 per home game) and
again in 1947 (56,108), the team tailed off during its undefeated season
of 1948 (45,517) and saw attendance drop steeply during 1949
(31,600). It was a curious dilemma—a team hurting itself with success—
but Brown was steadfast in his commitment. “Don't worry about the

fans,” he told his team. “Whether there's 100 or 100,000, I want you to
score as many points as you can.”
While Cleveland steamrolled through the AAFC, the NFL was seeing
tight competition. In 1947, the Cardinals edged the Bears by a game for
the Western Conference title, then beat Philadelphia, 28–21, for their
only NFL title. The Eagles, whose fortunes had begun to turn shortly
after Bell sold his stake, went on to play in and win the next two league
titles, shutting out the Cardinals, 7–0, in 1948, and the Rams, 14–0, in
1949.
Finally, in December 1949, after two days of negotiations at
Philadelphia's Racquet Club, the AAFC capitulated, to terms not much
better than what they'd turned down a year before. Just two days before
the Browns were to play the 49ers in what would become the last AAFC
title game, the “merger” between the NFL and AAFC was announced,
with the new league accepting just three teams, the Browns, the 49ers,
and the Baltimore Colts (who'd agreed to pay Marshall a $50,000
territorial rights fee). Originally the new league was to be known as the
“National-American Football League.” But the flawed semantics couldn't
survive the off-season. Less than three months later, Bell announced that
the league would continue to be called the National Football League, and
that only the conferences would change their names, from East and West
to National and American (even those labels would last for just three
years; the Eastern and Western conference designations returned in
1953).
Brown and Marshall had developed a mutual dislike during the earlier
truce talks, and at the first meeting of the joint league, in the winter of
1950, they tangled again. Marshall wanted the Browns designated a
“swing team” in the realigned, thirteen-team NFL, with a schedule that
would have them playing each of the other teams just once. Brown
fought it bitterly, threatening to pull out if the Browns were so
designated. Bell acted as the conciliator, ultimately making Baltimore
the swing team. Brown would remember the Washington owner as an
“obnoxious” man who “insulted your intelligence and had a great habit
of sleeping most of the day and showing up at the meetings late in the

afternoon. We then had to stop the proceedings to brief him on all that
had been accomplished. By that time all of us were pretty tired and
ready to adjourn, but he was rested and mentally sharp. That was when
he tried to work some of his little deals.”
For all the discussion about which club would be the swing team, the
most important decision at the league meeting involved not divisional
structure but rules. Following the AAFC's lead in lifting limitations on
substitutions, the NFL announced that it would allow unlimited
substitutions in the 1950 season. This was a less obvious decision than it
seems in retrospect. Many who wrote about and coached the games in
the late ’40s thought that unlimited substitution would hurt football.
When Red Blaik used two platoons for Army in 1948, he was widely
criticized; during a game with Stanford at Yankee Stadium, the Cadets
were booed each time they changed units. But that game was a 43–0
blowout, and Bell was confident—with the leveling influence of the draft
—that such mismatches would be rare at the pro level, where
competitive balance was honed to a keener edge than in the wildly
divergent college ranks. In the long term, unlimited substitution would
bring about the end of football's renaissance men, the two-way players,
who would no longer play every down, but instead be used on one side
of the ball or the other, depending on where a coach thought they'd be
most helpful. In the short term, this meant that Brown could continue
the practice he'd devised in 1949, of calling the plays himself, and
shuttling them in by way of alternating guards. Impervious to the
criticism this drew from writers, and the terse but compliant response
afforded him by his quarterback, Graham, Brown was convinced that
calling the plays from the sidelines—with input from Collier and other
assistants in the press box—would afford him more control and make the
play calling more reliable and scientific.
For Bell, the merger, by any name, came as a personal triumph. In the
four years he'd been commissioner, he'd stabilized the league,
ameliorated some of its most heated bickering, helped bolster the
league's reputation, and fought off its greatest challenge. The league

meetings didn't get any less contentious—it still wasn't uncommon to
have lengthy discussions and a deadlocked vote on questions as minor as
whether to take a dinner break—but with Bell as the commissioner, the
spirit of the assemblage was more of brothers than antagonists.
For all Bell's efforts, there was still a question about whether the sport
of pro football could ever prosper. What Joe Carr had said before dying
in 1939 still largely held true: “No owner has made money from pro
football but a lot have gone broke thinking they could.” In 1948, the
Philadelphia Eagles were NFL champions, defeating the Chicago
Cardinals, 7–0, in the title game. They still lost money for the year, and
while some of that could be pegged to the war between the leagues, it
remained true that pro football had always been a high-risk enterprise
with a narrow profit margin. In 1948, the Eagles had revenues of
$624,782, with 86 percent of that sum coming from ticket sales. The
radio and television rights to their games brought in $20,975, or 3
percent of revenue, which was less than they earned for their exhibition
schedule, where they brought in $48,042. Their expenses were
$709,920, the primary cost being player payrolls, which accounted for
$268,819. In a booming postwar economy, playing in a large stadium, in
a major East Coast market, the world champions lost $85,000.
And yet, there was hope. Despite the losses, which had by the late ’40s
be come routine, there were signs of optimism. The Bears’ income passed
$1 million in 1948, and as the effect of the Browns was being felt
throughout both leagues, more clubs began conducting business on a
year-round basis. The American economy was booming and as the
postwar culture began to take shape, it was clear that all Americans
would have more leisure time, and many would spend much of that
watching sports.
The National Football League had ridden out a decade-long storm, its
primacy and viability intact. And though the business was small and
losses were often great, the league was nearing a point in which it could
seek some stability, after nearly a decade in which its very existence was
threatened.
Through it all, Bert Bell presided over the game, the cheerful
ambassador and tough policeman who, through the sheer force of will,
made sure that pro football would be in a position to thrive in the years

ahead.
The writer John Steadman remembered Bell vividly from this period,
walking into a press room filled with reporters covering an annual
league meeting in Philadelphia, carrying the religion of pro football with
his typical room-filling exuberance. “Who wants chicken sandwiches?”
bellowed the commissioner. “Who wants chocolate ice cream? Who
wants beer? Order what you want, boys, it's on the Eagles. They made
all the money this year.”

4 Going Deep

Inside the dimly lit visitors locker room in the bowels of Birmingham's
Legion Field, Paul “Tank” Younger sat on a wooden bench, too tired to
pull his jersey over his shoulder pads, too spent to ask one of his
Grambling College teammates for help. It was late afternoon, January 2,
1948, and the Tigers had just lost a hard-fought game, 27–21, to Central
State (Ohio) in the Vulcan Bowl, the annual postseason classic billed as
“the Rose Bowl for black colleges.”
Younger was a strapping, quietly confident bull of a man, 6-foot-2,
220 pounds, with a calm demeanor, and a fierce work ethic. Though
only a junior, he was already regarded among the loose confederation of
writers and coaches who followed the black colleges as the best player in
black college football. He'd run for 1,207 yards and 18 touchdowns that
season, and passed for 11 more.
Dejected and quiet, Younger's expression didn't change when
Grambling's clubhouse attendant walked up to him and said, in a low
voice, “Tank … there's a man here to see you.”
Younger asked him what he wanted.
“I don't know. Says he's looking for you.”
“Well,” said Younger, “tell him he'll have to wait.”
The attendant looked perturbed, and as his eyes searched the floor for
words, he interjected a clarification.
“Man's a white man,” the attendant added. “Says he's with the Los
Angeles Rams.”

Younger sighed, and stood up, and followed the attendant to the door
of the locker room, where amidst the postgame bustle stood a short, wiry
man, sporting a wrinkled suit and an easy smile.
“Tank, I'm Eddie Kotal of the Los Angeles Rams,” he said, greeting
Younger with a handshake. “I've been watching you.”
Kotal explained to Younger that he was the Rams’ college scout, and
that he spent most of his year traveling the country watching college
football players, to help the team decide who to take in the annual NFL
draft. Kotal often found himself explaining his occupation, since he was
at the time the only person in the country with such a job, the first fulltime, traveling scout in all of pro football. He had read and heard about
Younger, was familiar with his feats, and asked him if he might be
interested in playing pro football someday. Younger answered that he
certainly would be. The two men spoke a few minutes more and, before
leaving, Kotal promised, “I'll stay in touch with you— and I'll be
watching.”
At the time Kotal met Younger, there were only four blacks in the
National Football League. Each came from a major college, and had been
offered jobs after their war service was up. There had yet to be a black
selected in the National Football League draft. The dozens of historically
black colleges that populated the Southeast and Atlantic Coast were
ignored by pro football. Not a single player from any of the schools had
ever been offered a tryout with a pro team. Conventional wisdom held
that no one “at that level of competition” could play in the pro game.
The blinkered mind-set was consistent with the state of scouting in pro
football at the time, a haphazard pursuit that head coaches and assistant
coaches took up in their spare time. In the early winter, they would
make several calls around the country, to coaching cronies and others in
football, to gather recommendations. They'd show up to the drafts in
February armed with some notes and preseason football annuals—
Stanley Woodward's College Football and Street & Smith's College Football
were two perennial favorites— and select players about whom they
knew precious little.
Meanwhile, in Los Angeles, the Rams were executing the blueprint for
the future of pro football scouting. Dan Reeves was the first owner to

recognize not just the importance but also the potential of scouting. He
hired Kotal in 1946, and together they implemented a system of scouting
that dwarfed in scope anything ever attempted. Kotal was a full-time
employee who was away from the office 200 days a year, driving from
campus to campus, combing the country in the spring and the fall to
develop a network with coaches and to see as many potential pro
football players as he could find.
And what stuck with Tank Younger after his meeting with Kotal, what
made him shake his head and whistle to himself in sincere amazement,
was the plain fact: the first full-time scout in pro football had come to
Birmingham, just to watch Grambling College's Paul “Tank” Younger—
and he was only a junior.
So complete was the willful ignorance among the rest of the NFL teams
about players in black college football that the Rams didn't even use a
pick for Younger in the twenty-five-round draft held in February 1949.
But shortly thereafter, Kotal stopped at Grambling to sign Younger to a
free agent contract, making him the first player from a historically black
school to be signed by a pro football team.
What was nothing but a line of agate in most newspapers was a
historic occasion for the black colleges, a harbinger of hope for the
future of integration in sports. In July, before Younger left for the Rams’
training camp, Grambling coach Eddie Robinson sat down with him and
methodically explained what Younger might expect: a cold shoulder
from many of his teammates, late hits and dirty play from opponents,
and likelihood of racial slurs wherever he turned. “You have to let it go
in one ear and out the other,” Robinson implored, looking into Younger's
eyes. “You have to make the ball club.”
In this, Robinson was unusually adamant, emphasizing that the stakes
went beyond Younger and a professional football career. “Tank, if you
go up there and you don't make it, there's no telling how long it'll be
before somebody else gets a chance,” said Robinson. “They'll be able to
say, ‘We took the best you had to offer, and he wasn't good enough.’ ”
The success of Dan Reeves's scouting system was not yet apparent to the

rest of the league, but by 1949 it would propel the Rams into their first
of three consecutive NFL championship games, and solidify Reeves as
the league's premier innovator in what would increasingly be viewed as
the most important element in pro football management: evaluation of
college football players. After hiring Kotal in 1946, Reeves began to
assemble a dossier on every senior in the country. Kotal would then set
out by car in the beginning of the spring, at about the time teams began
their spring practices, and would hit most of the major universities in
the months ahead. While many in the Rams’ office suspected he took
advantage of his expense account and lack of supervision (“apparently
there were a lot of good prospects up by Vegas,” said one fellow Rams
employee), Kotal unquestionably delivered the goods. After returning in
the late spring to spend two months going over reports and providing
analysis, he would hop back in his car and crisscross the country once
more, from the early days of school's preseason training camps through
the end of the year, watching games on Saturday, taking Sunday to
travel, then hitting anywhere from five to ten schools per week, where
he would talk with coaches, look at game film, get 40-yard dash times
and as much other information as he could muster. After a dinner often
spent alone, Kotal would return to his hotel room to write more reports.
Meanwhile, the club had more than 100 bird dogs around the country
— mostly college head and assistant coaches, who filled out biannual
reports for $100 a year. In Los Angeles, the Rams also hired a number of
high school coaches to come in nightly and watch film of potential
prospects.
At the same time, a staff of assistants in the Rams’ offices sent out
questionnaires to every school in the country, asking for the raw data
and coaches’ comments to provide a dossier on each true prospect. The
reports from the coaches across the country came into a small room in
the Rams’ offices, where they would be sorted, collated, alphabetized,
and placed into a series of chunky three-ring binders. Behind the desk in
Reeves's office at the Rams’ headquarters was a giant map of the United
States, divided into six sections. Within each section was a series of
pushpins showing every four-year college in the country that played
football. From this haystack of data came the occasional needle of vital,
original information. Part of the routine was to send personnel sheets to

players as soon as they were identified as prospects in their junior year.
One sheet that came back to the Rams’ office late in 1948 was from
Oregon quarterback Norman Van Brocklin. The young passer was
considered one of the nation's top prospects, and ideally suited for the
frequent passing of the T formation offense. Kotal, reading over Van
Brocklin's questionnaire one night, fixed upon one of his fill-in-the-blank
answers: under the heading “When will you graduate?” Van Brocklin
had scrawled in “49 ma?” Following up on the lead, the Rams
discovered that Van Brocklin was ahead in his studies and might be able
to graduate in three and a half years. Armed with that information, they
selected him in the second round of the 1949 draft, to yelps of protest
from other owners in the league, when the pick was announced at the
draft in Chicago.
But Van Brocklin was indeed able to finish his studies early—finding
the last class he needed in a summer session at Swarthmore—and Bell
approved the selection, allowing Van Brocklin to join the Rams in 1949,
where he would quickly press the All-Pro Waterfield for playing time.
It wasn't just scouting in which the Rams paced the league. For much
of the ’50s they were among the NFL's prime innovators in strategy,
marketing, design, and public relations. Success at the box office would
take longer.
Saddled with the obligation of the extra $5,000 guaranteed to all
visiting teams, plus the major expenses of moving the franchise from
Cleveland and the war of publicity and words with the rival Dons of the
AAFC, Reeves suffered staggering losses in his early years on the coast.
In 1946, the club posted a disappointing 6-4-1 record and lost $161,000,
after which Reeves fired both of the Walshes and committed himself to
the constant supervision of the franchise, assuming the general
manager's role. New coach Bob Snyder was unable to reverse the trend
in 1947, while the Dons continued to outdraw the Rams, and the Rams
lost $184,000, forcing Reeves to bring in partners.
Facing a fifth season of losses exceeding $50,000, he was in danger of
falling victim to the government's “hobby” law, which stipulated that
anyone who lost more than $50,000 five years in a row could no longer
write off those losses as a business expense and, further, would have to
pay a tax on the total amount deducted in the previous years. Reeves

took in three partners, including wealthy UCLA alum Ed Pauley, Jr., a
Democratic Party power and oil businessman who was an avid
sportsman. (UCLA's basketball arena, Pauley Pavilion, would eventually
bear his name.)

Each of the investors paid just $1 for a stake in the team, agreeing to
bear a portion of any future losses. Though Reeves's total share had
dipped to just 30 percent by 1949, he wasn't worried. His old Cleveland
partner and close friend Fred Levy still controlled 20 percent, and all the
partners signed an agreement giving Reeves final say on football
decisions unless partners controlling a majority of the shares opposed
him.
Even as the losses accrued, Reeves's changes were already bringing the
Rams to the verge of success, both on the field and at the box office. In
the offseason of 1947, he'd fired his public relations man, Maxwell Stiles,
because there had been grumbling among the other papers that Stiles
was leaking stories to his friends and colleagues at the Long Beach PressTelegram.
Through a friend of one of the partners in Reeves's stock brokerage,
Reeves received a recommendation of Tex Schramm, then a twenty-sixyear-old sports editor of the Austin American-Statesman, who'd recently
graduated from the University of Texas on the GI Bill. He'd grown up in
Southern California and a few years earlier had done some work for the
Los Angeles Times.
The young Tex Schramm was not yet the force of nature that he would
become in later decades, but even in his college years he had made quite
an impression as a gruff, handsome, whip-smart young journalist who
was a decent writer, an excellent reporter, and—a rare thing in Texas—
an avid fan of pro football.
Reeves invited Schramm to Los Angeles for an interview, and was
immediately impressed with the young man's wit and maturity. At a
salary of $4,000, Schramm accepted the job and moved with his wife,
Marty, from Austin back to the Los Angeles suburb of San Gabriel, not
far from where Schramm had played high school football in Alhambra.
Schramm's assignment was a grinding one, but typical of what pro
football teams did to get press coverage in the era. The five daily

newspapers in Los Angeles were competitive, but understaffed, and most
couldn't afford a daily beat reporter for both pro football teams. On
many days during the season, the Rams’ publicist had to write the stories
himself, altering the leads slightly at each newspaper. Even columns
occasionally had to be fabricated out of whole cloth, often in the style of
the writer. This was particularly painful in the case of writers like John
B. Old, whose hackneyed style was amplified by his own personal index
card file of clichés.
In that first season, Schramm improved everything he touched, from
the amount of coverage the Rams received in local papers and the
number of write-ups generated in other cities, to the quality of the
clipping service the team used for its scrapbook and the quality and
readability of its game programs (which around the league at that time
consisted of little more, in Schramm's words, than “a bunch of head
shots with a Coke ad in the middle”).
After Reeves and Kotal agreed that they needed to do more to scout
the hundreds of small colleges around the country, it was Schramm who
came up with the inspired idea of getting scouting tips for free, through
the ruse of “Tom Harmon's Little All-America Team.” Using the Michigan
star and former Rams player as a beard of sorts, the Rams sent out
“voting ballots” to coaches at every small school in the country that
played football, asking them to name the five best players they played
against. That gave them early lines on such future Hall of Famers as
Andy Robustelli, from tiny Arnold College in Connecticut, and Dick
“Night Train” Lane from Scottsbluff Community College in Nebraska.
By 1949, Schramm was promoted from the PR job, and given the title
assistant to the president, and began performing many of the duties of a
traditional general manager. As his replacement, he hired his old friend
Tex Maule, another atypically avid pro football fan from Texas, whose
eclectic back ground had included time as a circus trapeze artist and a
merchant seaman. Each man knew enough about football to provide
valued help with Reeves's relatively comprehensive draft preparation,
and helped the Rams further distance themselves from the rest of the
league.

Then, too, there were instances of pure serendipity. One of the players
on those Rams teams was Fred Gehrke, a halfback from Utah, who had
first played with the Rams when the franchise was in Cleveland in 1940,
then spent the war working as an aviation artist for Northrop
Engineering, rejoining the club in 1945. Gehrke, an art major in college,
was fascinated with the idea of painting a logo on the Rams’ drab brown
leather helmets. When he tried to explain the idea to Bob Snyder, the
coach couldn't even understand what he was talking about. Showing a
sketch of a helmet with a ram's horn to Schramm, Gehrke explained the
concept again and, with Schramm's encouragement, brought a helmet
home. Working in his garage, he painted the entire outer surface of the
helmet blue, and then painted the outline of a ram's horn on each side.
Filling in the outline with bright gold paint, Gehrke created an
eyecatching effect unlike anything ever seen before on a helmet. It
wasn't so literal as the painting of a ram, or as realistic as a drawing of
an actual ram's horn. Instead the graceful rendition was a
representational, nearly experimental, depiction of a ram's horn,
spiraling out from the front brim, sweeping up across the crown of the
helmet, and looping back down to an upturned tip by the ear hole. It
was a work of modern art on the side of a football helmet.
Dan Reeves loved it, and dispatched Gehrke back to his home to paint
every helmet that the Rams owned, paying him $1 per helmet plus
expenses. When the team took the field for the traditional exhibition
opener at L.A. Coliseum against the Redskins in August of 1948—blue
jerseys with gold numerals, blue-and-gold helmets gleaming under the
night lights—they were greeted by extended, appreciative applause. As
an aesthetic statement, Gehrke's helmet design was a masterpiece of pop
art. As a utilitarian move, it was equally successful, making the team and
its players instantly recognizable, and starting a revolution of helmet
design that would, in the coming years, be felt at every level of football.
Decades later, the popular artist LeRoy Neiman would say of the Rams’
helmet design, “It is the most effective pop art symbol in all of sports. It
captures the very purpose of the helmet—to ram someone. How
satisfying it must be, for the artist, to see his art functioning every
Sunday.”
After the disappointing 6-6 record in 1947, the Rams hired Clark

Shaughnessy to be the team's “technical adviser,” working as an assistant
to head coach Bob Snyder.
Throughout the ’40s, the mercurial Shaughnessy was regarded as the
reigning genius of football strategy as well as, perhaps, a less-thanbalanced man, one who seemed so preoccupied with the strategies and
tactics of the game that the rest of the world seemed to escape his
notice.
After stops at Maryland and Pitt during the war, he took his first fulltime pro job in 1947 as an assistant with the Washington Redskins, and
was summoned to Los Angeles after that season, at the behest of Snyder,
who had played for the Bears when Shaughnessy was advising the team.
Reeves was so dazzled by Shaughnessy's brilliance that he fired Snyder
in the preseason, and named Shaughnessy the head coach. Taking
advantage of his newfound authority, Shaughnessy soon began an
extensive series of changes designed to modernize the attack. He held
two-a-day practices throughout training camp, even practicing in the
morning on days when the team was playing an evening exhibition
game.
As the tactics grew more complex, so did the terminology that
accompanied them. And Shaughnessy's lexicon was the most extensive in
the sport. Offensive formations were based on a combination of
directional signals and the commands that plowing farmers gave to their
mules. An end out wide to the right side was “east,” to the left side was
“west.” The left halfback in motion to the right was “gee,” the right
halfback in motion to the left was “haw.” For blocking, he used a
combination of mnemonic cues, what he called “memory hooks,” and
masculine (for blocks on linemen and linebackers) and feminine
(defensive backs) names. From these formulas came a blinding array of
blitz, pass rush, and secondary coverage calls that could be as simple as
“Green Tornado” or as complicated as “Brown Stash Mutt Purple Jack
Shuffle Right Wheel Left.” (Though his complex vocabulary wouldn't
survive, many of its principles—especially the homonyms and mnemonic
cues—would carry into the modern day.)
When Tank Younger showed up to training camp in 1949, he was
presented with the full-frontal assault of Shaughnessy's complex
terminology. Told to study and learn the thick book with its obscure and

intricate lexicon, he was initially intimidated. Younger had experienced
nothing like it at Grambling, where Eddie Robinson's simple playbook
contained a reverse play known as Douglas MacArthur (“I shall return”),
and little rhyme or reason in the numbering system used to determine
nomenclature. The first night of camp, Younger went to the pay phone at
the end of the hall in the Redlands College dorm, and called Robinson,
who provided reassurance and an explanation. Though he didn't use
much of Shaughnessy's system, Robinson was familiar with the
terminology, and helped Younger find the logic within it.
Back at Grambling, Younger's tryout was considered so vital that
Robinson had started subscribing to all of Los Angeles's daily
newspapers. Each afternoon during that late summer, Robinson and
Grambling athletic news director Collie Nicholson went to the university
library, to parse the sports pages for clues to Younger's progress. They
celebrated one September morning when they read a staff story in the
Los Angeles Times, which noted that “Younger, the continually surprising
Negro, virtually nailed down the No. 1 right-half position with his
vicious blocking and running.”
Younger lived up to his promise. In the Rams’ first exhibition game, at
home in the Los Angeles Times Charity Game against the Redskins, he
was introduced with the Rams starters and as the PA announcer
introduced “Tank Younger, Grambling College” he burst forth in a full
sprint from the Coliseum tunnel and received a rousing cheer from the
crowd of 90,000. That night, he found himself at linebacker, trying to
keep up with the Redskins’ fleet back Dick Sandifer. When Sandifer
broke free past Younger on a pass route, the rookie simply jumped and
tackled Sandifer, bringing an inevitable defensive penalty. On the
sidelines, Shaughnessy brought Younger over and berated him for the
foul. “But Coach,” said Younger, “you told us if we thought someone was
getting away from us, to just tackle him to save a touchdown.” Shaughnessy looked at him for a moment, then turned to the Rams’ trainer and
said, “Wipe this boy off and get him back in the game.” Tank Younger
went back in, knowing he'd made the team.
In that 1949 season, the Rams became the most dangerous team in the

league. The mother lode of draft talent matured quickly, with Van
Brocklin earning playing time at quarterback and Younger starring on
both sides of the ball, as a fullback and linebacker. Heisman winner and
Army legend Glenn Davis completed his Army commitment, giving the
team a gifted receiver out of the backfield. Vitamin T. Smith was drafted
from tiny Abilene Christian, and instantly made a contribution in the
backfield.
Shaughnessy's 1949 team also boasted an array of speed never before
seen in pro football, with six school sprint champions on the roster, five
of whom had recorded sub-10.0 times in the 100-yard dash. The key
acquisition was the signing of Elroy “Crazy Legs” Hirsch, the gamebreaking halfback who had grown tired of the struggles in the AAFC
with the Chicago Rockets and jumped to the Rams. Shaughnessy treated
Hirsch with great care, putting him on a daily five-mile running regimen
to strengthen his injured leg, and fitting him with a lightweight but
strong helmet of molded plastic (which would within three years become
the industry standard, replacing leather helmets) to prevent concussions.
Hirsch found a new position in Los Angeles. Shaugh-nessy moved him
out of the backfield and away from the line of scrimmage, as the league's
first true flanker back, offset from the line of scrimmage and several
yards wide of the tight end. With Bob Shaw staying at the end of the
interior line, and Tom Fears split out on the other side, the Rams became
the first team to use three ends consistently, and since all three were
talented, opposing teams had trouble containing them. In their last six
regular season games, en route to winning the Western Conference title,
the Rams scored more than 40 points four times.
But on the morning of the 1949 title game, as rain approached
monsoonlike conditions in Los Angeles, much of that speed was
neutralized. In a storm that Younger would characterize as “a Louisiana
frog strangler,” Greasy Neale's Eagles shut down the Rams’ attack, and
emerged with a 14–0 win, their second straight title. Among those in
attendance that day, sitting high up in the press box, keeping to himself,
making precise, detailed notes, was Browns assistant Blanton Collier.
The “merger” with the AAFC had been announced days earlier, and Paul
Brown was already hard at work on the next season.
“The worst team in our league could beat the best team in theirs,”

huffed George Preston Marshall about the upstart AAFC and the three
teams who would be joining the NFL in 1950. The schedule for the 1950
season was announced in April, and Bert Bell had done his work well.
On the eve of the opening Sunday slate of five games, the season would
kick off with a single game Saturday night, September 16, at
Philadelphia's Municipal Stadium, with the two-time defending NFL
champion Eagles playing host to the four-time AAFC title-holder Browns.
It was dubbed by many in the press as “The World Series of Pro
Football.”
During the exhibition season, the Browns swept through the NFL's
lesser lights in a way sure to guarantee attention and resentment,
averaging 35 points per game en route to a 5-0 record. The finale was
played at War Memorial Stadium in Buffalo, a merciless rout of the
Steelers that was never as close as the 41–31 final score would indicate.
As the teams headed to the locker room at halftime, Steelers defensive
end Bob Davis yelled at the Browns, “This isn't football! You guys ought
to join the Celtics!”
The Steelers discovered what the rest of the league would know soon
enough: Cleveland's personnel was excellent, and it had developed a pass
offense that, if not ahead of the Rams in speed or sophistication, was
more precisely calibrated. The NFL hadn't seen anything like the Browns’
precision “comeback” patterns, with Dante Lavelli and Dub Jones
snapping off their down-and-out routes by taking sharper angles to the
sidelines, coming back to Graham's passes in a way that made it nearly
impossible to defend.
In the opener, the Browns would confront what many regarded as one
of the NFL's all-time great squads. The Eagles’ offense was anchored by
star running back Steve Van Buren, a classic bruiser instrumental to the
team's back-to-back titles. The key to coach Greasy Neale's “Eagle”
defense was beefy middle guard Bucko Kilroy, who lined up over the
center and controlled the holes to either side, allowing the other four
linemen to concentrate on containing outside runs. It was widely felt,
especially after the Eagles shut out the Rams in the 1949 title game, that
the “Eagle” defense was impregnable to the pass.
In front of 71,237 fans, the Browns kicked off and held the Eagles on
three plays, forcing a punt, which Cleveland's Don Phelps returned 64

yards for a touchdown, only to have the play called back by a clipping
penalty. Graham threw three straight incompletions on that first
possession, each revealing in its own way. With the Browns sending
running back Rex Baumgardner in motion, to be picked up by a
linebacker, the Eagles consistently put defensive halfback Russ Craft on
right halfback Dub Jones, who was coming out of the backfield and
running 10-yard square-out routes to the sidelines. Graham didn't throw
to Jones, but noticed that Craft was covering him more closely each
time, inching up toward the receiver in hopes of a possible interception.
When Cleveland got the ball again, now down 3–0, Graham called a
similar pattern, with Baumgardner again drawing the attention of the
linebacker, and Dante Lavelli and Mac Speedie drawing the safeties with
curl patterns in the middle of the field. Jones again ran a square-out, but
this time, when Craft charged toward the sideline for an interception,
Jones shifted his route to an out-and-up, and was far behind Craft
streaking down the sidelines when he caught Graham's expertly lofted
59-yard touchdown pass.
Surreptitiously, the Browns were also widening their running lanes.
Early on in the game, Cleveland came to the line of scrimmage with
their linemen spaced a few inches further apart than usual. They'd hold
that spacing for a while, then widen again a few plays later. Since both
the Philadelphia defensive tackles tended to line up just off the outside
shoulder of the offensive guard across the line of scrimmage, the Eagles’
blind adherence to this alignment widened the gaps between their two
tackles, where only Bucko Kilroy was operating. Philadelphia paid the
price on trap plays that sprang the bruising Marion Motley for big runs.
A Motley fumble deep in Browns territory gave the Eagles a chance at
changing the momentum. But after Cleveland stoned the Eagles four
times inside the Cleveland five-yard line, the rout was on. The Browns
led 14–3 at the half en route to a resounding 35–10 win.
After the game, Neale churlishly dismissed the Browns as “a team that
does nothing but pass,” but among the Eagles players, there were few
excuses. A dismayed Russ Craft said, “We just never played against a
team that threw to a spot as well as Cleveland. We would be on top of
their receivers but they caught the ball anyway because it was so well
timed. It was like trying to cover three Don Hutsons … impossible …

impossible.”
Bert Bell entered the Browns’ locker room beaming, congratulating
Brown for his part in the win, and calling the Browns “the best-coached
football team I've ever seen.”
For the rest of the season, the Browns were in the crosshairs, as the
established league tried to find a way to beat them. While the two other
AAFC entries, the Colts and the 49ers, stumbled to a combined 4-20
record, the Browns carried the flag for the defunct league, going 10-2
during the 1950 regular season. The only team with any success against
them was the New York Giants, who, under the exacting leadership of
veteran coach Steve Owen, had devised a defense to counteract the
Browns; it looked similar to a 6-1, except that the two ends were decoys,
who often peeled away at the snap into short zones, to prevent the
Browns’ short passes to the shallow areas behind the line. Behind them
came four defensive backs, arranged in a wide arc, with the cornerbacks
playing closer to the line of scrimmage and the safeties in the center of
the field further back. The defense, known as “the umbrella,” was
directed on the field by an AAFC refugee named Tom Landry, a cool,
analytical defensive back with little speed but a professor's sense of calm
rationalism and a comprehensive knowledge of the Browns’ personnel.
Sometimes the ends would drop into coverage, at other times they would
rush the quarterback, and this mixture of looks confounded Otto Graham
and frustrated the Browns’ short passing game. In the teams’ first
meeting, Graham couldn't complete a single pass in the first half.
Losing both games to the Giants, Cleveland wound up tied with New
York for the Eastern Conference championship. In the playoff game, the
Browns prevailed in a 9–7 struggle, with three Groza field goals
providing the margin, and earning the team a berth in the NFL
championship game in its first season in the NFL. Across the country,
ready in waiting, were the Los Angeles Rams, who had run through
another season of dominating performances.
The loss to the Eagles in the 1949 championship game had led to
another eventful off-season in Los Angeles. In February, assistant coach
Joe Stydahar came to Reeves with news that his old teammate Gene
Ronzani had been named head coach of the Green Bay Packers, and
wanted Stydahar to be his top assistant. Before giving Stydahar

permission to leave, Reeves asked for forty-eight hours to work out
details. When Stydahar returned two days later, set to say his goodbyes,
Reeves greeted him by saying, “Joe, you are the new head coach of the
Los Angeles Rams.” The stunning turn of events, firing Shaughnessy,
football's most famous innovator, for an assistant coach who was well
liked but unversed in the intricacies of the Rams’ attack, left Stydahar
speechless and his former mentor uncharacteristically bitter. Asked for
his reaction to the news, Shaughnessy said, “Stydahar coach of the
Rams? Why, I could take a high school team and beat him.” (To those
closest to the team, the shocking decision was less surprising.
Shaughnessy's eccentricities had continued unabated, and as the
playbook grew thicker each week, even the good soldier Waterfield had
bridled near the end of the 1949 season.)
Stydahar was a player's coach but an old-school footballer, whom Pat
Summerall once described as “the only man I have ever known who
could smoke a cigar, chew tobacco and drink whiskey at the same time.”
In an attempt to replace Shaughnessy's technical expertise, Stydahar
hired his former Bears teammate, Hampton Pool, then an assistant coach
at Santa Barbara Junior College. A keen tactician in his own right, Pool
wound up devising much of the game plans for both offense and defense
for the Rams.
Reeves's other major decision over the off-season would have broader
implications, as it involved an embrace of the emerging technology of
television. Though World War II brought technical experimentation to a
halt, research and testing began in earnest following the war, when in
1946 DuMont and NBC aired nine hours and thirty minutes of primetime programming each week, with nearly four hours of that devoted to
sports programming. The most popular of the early sports shows was The
Gillette Cavalcade of Sports, owned by the razor manufacturer and
broadcast on NBC. Gillette had been one of the earliest believers in the
potential of TV, already having realized huge market share gains due to
sports broadcasts on radio. The Cavalcade was a weekly boxing show
from Madison Square Garden. The format of boxing, with plenty of
action taking place in a small, well-lit area, was perfectly suited to
television and the medium's limitations at the time, which tended to
make any medium or long shots unrecognizable. The popularity of

boxing on television grew quickly, prompting one writer to remark “the
passionate affair between television and professional fighting turned into
an orgy.”
The makers of Gillette sensed what others in the business would soon
find out. Sports on television fueled the wholesale purchase of sets. NBC
producer Harry Coyle recalled,“When we put on the World Series in
1947, heavyweight fights, the Army-Navy football game, the sales of
television sets just spurted.” In a postwar boom that saw car sales
mushroom, television purchases did the same, jumping from 7,000 sets
in 1946 to 14,000 in 1947 to 172,000 in 1948. Sales still lagged on the
West Coast because the coaxial cable required to feed broadcasts
through a network hadn't made it over the Rocky Mountains, leaving
stations in California forced to run shows from networks later, after they
had been converted to film or kinescopes.
While boxing was dominating the airwaves, Major League Baseball
was moving gingerly to embrace the new medium, and often meeting
disastrous consequences when doing so. After winning the NL pennant in
1948, the Boston Braves sold the rights to televise all their home games
in 1949 and 1950, and nearly all of them in 1951 and 1952. By the end
of the contract, despite having a contender in three of those four
seasons, their attendance had dropped from 1,455,000 in 1948 to
281,278 in 1952, and they were soon on their way out of town. The
Cleveland Indians were among baseball's powers in the same period, but
after televising many of their home games for eight seasons, they'd seen
their attendance drop 67 percent. Overall attendance in Major League
Baseball dropped from nearly 21 million in 1948 to 14.3 million in
1953.
And if television hurt the majors, it's fair to say that it nearly killed the
minor leagues. From an all-time high of 42 million in 1949, attendance
would drop to 13 million by the end of the ’50s. Fans wouldn't travel
downtown to see minor league baseball when they could watch the big
clubs on their home television or at the corner tavern.
All this would seem obvious after the fact, but the patterns were not
yet so clear in 1950. With the Browns set to join the NFL that season,
Paul Brown offered the exclusive television sponsorship rights to the
Browns’ games to Cleveland Gas and Electric for $5,000. “They said that

seemed high,” he recalled. “I had to convince them. They gave me the
money, but it was more to humor me than anything else.”
The Rams, who had lost money even as they advanced to the
championship game in 1949, were searching for any way they might
increase revenues. The Admiral Television Company approached the
team with an offer to broadcast all their home games. (Live broadcasts of
road games back to the West Coast remained a technical impossibility.)
Reeves was ambivalent about the risk to the home gate, which had
averaged nearly 50,000 per game in the
1949 season. Ultimately, the Rams struck a unique deal with Admiral.
After Schramm spent some time researching league attendance records,
the team calculated that they could fairly expect a 10 percent increase in
attendance, and added a provision to the contract stipulating that any
attendance short of a 10 percent increase would be compensated by
Admiral. That August, as the high-powered Rams were providing
glimpses of their offensive potential (scoring 70 points against Baltimore
in a game in San Antonio), ads were running in the Los Angeles papers
promising live pro football in the home.
After losing a closely fought opener at home to the Chicago Bears, the
Rams won eight of their next nine games, during which they unveiled
the most potent 1-2 passing attack in pro football history. In a year when
the rest of the league's teams averaged 176 yards per game passing,
Waterfield and Van Brocklin averaged 294 yards per game, throwing for
a combined 29 touchdowns in 12 games. The team would set twenty-two
scoring records that season, averaging 38.8 points per game, an NFL
record that still stood in 2004.
Defenses facing the Rams confronted an array of problems. Tom Fears
was the league's best possession receiver on one side, the flanker Hirsch
a fleet, dexterous burner on the other side. And they were joined by Bob
“Seabiscuit” Boyd, a blazing fast end who had been a freshman at
Compton Community College when the Rams began their first training
camp in 1946. The rookie caught only 17 passes in 1950, but his speed
made him a terror to cover, especially when he came into the game as a
third end in Pool's three-receiver sets.
In a three-game homestand in October, the Rams rolled to 163 points,

then scored 88 during their next two road games. By the end of the 1950
season, the Rams’ aura of glamour was felt throughout the country. It
owed to the spectacular quality of their passing game, the celebrity of
minority owner Bob Hope, the cachet of the team's Beverly Hills address,
a fan base studded with Hollywood executives and stars, even the
Gehrke-designed helmet (which by

1950 was even shinier, with the design baked into the plastic shell,
saving Gehrke from repainting the helmets each week).
Of course, having a few movie starlet wives didn't hurt: Waterfield was
still often referred to as “Mr. Jane Russell.” Tom Harmon, married to
actress Elyse Knox, quit the game in 1947 after two injury-plagued
seasons, but by 1949, another Heisman winner, Glenn Davis, joined the
team. His wife, Terry Moore, was also in the movies. And then there was
Hirsch, whose movie star looks—strong jaw, sweeping shock of hair—
got him on the silver screen, where he starred as himself in Crazylegs, the
1953 biopic that featured several Rams in smaller roles.
And yet for all this, despite the success, excitement, and national
reputation, it was a horrible season at the box office, with the Rams
suffering an attendance decline of nearly 50 percent, from 49,854 per
game to 26,804. No conclusion could be reached other than that
televising home games was directly responsible for the loss in
attendance. After a 51–14 rout of the Green Bay Packers clinched a
playoff showdown with the Bears for the Western Conference title, the
Admiral Television experiment came to an end. The playoff win over the
Bears, played in Los Angeles but not broadcast on local television, drew
83,501, and fairly rang the death knell of home television for the Rams
and, as it would turn out, the rest of the league. Following the season,
Admiral paid $307,000 to the Rams to cover the cost of the attendance
drop. “This was back,” noted Schramm, “when $300,000 was a lot of
money.”
The 1950 championship game match-up had an eerie sense of déjà vu,
with the Cleveland Browns playing host to the Rams. For Reeves,
Waterfield, and the rest of the Rams, it was their first return to
Cleveland since winning the world title in 1945. For the Browns, it was a
chance to complete their quest for an NFL title and, in so doing, reassert
the validity of each of their four previous AAFC crowns.

In subfreezing conditions, with a cruel thirty-mile-an-hour wind
coming in from Lake Erie, the game was played in front of a modest
Christmas Eve crowd of 29,751 at Cleveland Stadium.
The two potent offenses slashed back and forth throughout the game,
overwhelming two capable defenses. Midway through the fourth quarter,
Graham converted two fourth downs into first downs, and completed a
long drive with his fourth touchdown pass of the day, to move the
Browns to within 28–27. After a Cleveland stand, the Browns got the ball
back with just over five minutes left and moved steadily downfield.
Graham had just gained a first down on a quarterback draw when
linebacker Milan Lazetich hit him from behind, forcing a fumble
recovered by the Rams at their own 22-yard line with just 3:16 to play.
“It was the lowest moment of my life,” Graham would say later.
“Honestly, I was more devastated at that moment than I was a few years
ago when the doctor told me I had cancer.” As he reached the sideline,
Graham's head was bowed in dejection, preparing for a grilling from his
coach. But instead of criticizing, Brown put his hand on his quarterback's
shoulder and told him, “Don't worry, Otts. We'll get the ball back for you
and win this thing yet.”
The Browns held and, with 1:50 left and no timeouts, they took over
at their own 34. On the first play, Graham called a keeper, gaining 14
yards. Three completed passes later, the Browns moved the ball to the
center of the field, and Groza kicked a 16-yard field goal with 16
seconds left, to give Cleveland the 30–28 win.
Though Waterfield had completed 18 of 22 passes for 312 yards,
Stydahar called upon the stronger-armed Van Brocklin (who broke his
rib in the Chicago game a week earlier) to make the last desperation
throw. After a return to the Rams’ 46, Van Brocklin's long bomb to Glenn
Davis was grasped by both Davis and Browns defensive back Warren
Lahr at the Browns’ five-yard line, before Lahr emerged from the scuffle
with the ball in the end zone as the clock struck: 00, and Cleveland's fans
stormed the field in jubilation.
“It was terrible,” said Graham. “We didn't know for several seconds
what the referee was going to call. We were sure Lahr had intercepted.
But what if they gave Davis the ball and a touchdown? And what if they

called it a safety or something?”
It was the game that Brown would later call the greatest he'd ever
seen, and in the locker room he was unusually ebullient, shouting,
“What the hell was the final score?” The Cleveland Browns had been in
existence for five years and won five championships, but this win made
them, for the first time, undisputed world champions. Bert Bell, making
another postgame visit to the Browns’ dressing room, as he'd done after
the opener in Philadelphia, called it “the greatest football game I've ever
seen.” And when he found Brown, he reached out to embrace the coach
and said, “You are the greatest team to ever play football.”
Whatever else coaches, players, and other observers thought of the 1950
title game, one fact was obvious: at a time when there were only
fourteen blacks in the National Football League, nine of them were on
the field playing for the two teams in the championship game. Pro
football would never be the same. In the coming years, the sport
wouldn't merely reflect the changes in society, it would help bring them
about.
The first generation of players to integrate the game after the war had
encountered fierce resistance; many had been emotionally and physically
scarred by the experience. The Rams’ Jim Hardy would long remember
his friend and teammate Kenny Washington enduring constant verbal
abuse and late hits and sucker punches in a 1947 game in which he
scored three touchdowns for the Rams. Later, when the two men were
alone, Washington said, quietly and matter-of-factly, “Sometimes, it's
hell to be a Negro, Jim.”
“I'll never forget the hurt in his eyes,” said Hardy.“But his statement
wasn't one of self-pity by any means. It was simply a social comment,
and he was alone, and there wasn't any way to comfort him.”
Similar events were occurring, on and off the field, throughout pro
football. “When Joe Perry joined us, I couldn't get a cab for him in
Baltimore in ’47,” said the 49ers’ Lou Spadia. “He couldn't stay with us,
which he understood. And I was assigned the job of getting him out to
this black doctor's home. And we were standing outside the Lord
Baltimore Hotel and I'd wave for a cab to come, and the cab would come

by, and we'd start to get in and the cab driver would say, ‘I'll take you,
but not the nigger.’ Finally I had to call the doctor, and he came down
and got him.”
But by the early ’50s, the integrationist movement in sports was
reaching a second phase. The writer Gerald Early has noted that, after
spending time fighting with the integrated U.S. forces in the Korean War,
black veterans returning to the United States “found segregation
intolerable.” The same thing would happen in pro football in the coming
years, where teams integrated on the field were not so easily split apart
off it. It would be decades before the last vestiges of institutional racism
disappeared, but with the arrival of Paul Brown's Cleveland team in the
NFL in 1950, and the emergence of stars like Younger, as a
representative of the long-ignored black schools, a new era was dawning,
and the minds of scouts, coaches, and owners around the league were
beginning to change. A game predicated so much on an environment of
pure competition could not long ignore an obvious edge offered by the
best black players.
A year later, the Rams and Browns would meet again for the NFL title,
this time in Los Angeles. The season had provided the first hint of
commercial success for the Rams, who blacked out home games and saw
attendance spike back up to 43,813 per game.
Waterfield and Van Brocklin, evenly splitting the duties again,
combined for 26 touchdown passes, 17 of which went to Hirsch, who
had one of the great receiving seasons in history, averaging 22.7 yards
on each of his league-leading 66 catches. The Browns were, if anything,
even stronger than the 1950 team, going 11-1 and thumping the Rams,
38–23, in an early-season game in Los Angeles.
As the teams prepared for their title game rematch at the Coliseum,
the Rams suddenly faced a dire public relations crisis. It had been the
team's policy, throughout earlier seasons, to give free tickets to the
family members of the media covering the games. But the league, hoping
to further establish its own legitimacy as a major league organization,
stipulated that no complimentary tickets could be given out for
championship games. (There were good reasons for this: since the
players themselves got 70 percent of the gate in prize money, any free
tickets necessarily took money out of their own pocket.) Presented with

the news that family members wouldn't receive free passes for the title
game, the Los Angeles print media banded together. Schramm
remembered one writer telling him “if that was the way we were going
to be, we weren't going to see the word ‘Rams’ in the newspapers for the
next seven days.” Faced with this challenge, Schramm convinced Reeves
to buy 300 tickets that could then be handed out as media comps. That
crisis averted, the game received the expected buildup, drawing a crowd
of 57,522 at the Coliseum.
They would see another classic, entertaining and closely fought
throughout. Early in the fourth quarter, just three plays after the Browns
had tied the game at 17, Van Brocklin threw 20 yards downfield to the
streaking Fears, who caught the ball just as he split defenders Cliff Lewis
and Tom James at mid-field, and brought it all the way in for the gamewinning 73-yard touchdown reception. Afterward, Dan Reeves wryly
noted that the second title was so sweet, it was probably worth the
fortune he'd lost getting it. And that he was pleased, this time, to be
staying put in a city that had embraced his team.
The game was a watershed of sorts. It was the first national broadcast
of an NFL championship game, with the coaxial cable finally connecting
both coasts in 1951. (The 1949 title game was televised live only on the
West Coast.) The DuMont network paid $95,000 for the rights for the
dream rematch, and concluded a season in which Bell had charted the
league's future course.
Greeted with the Rams’ disastrous attendance with home games
televised in 1950, Bell had decreed in 1951 that the teams in the league
could not sell broadcast rights to home games, and must black them out
instead. That brought an inevitable challenge from the U.S. Justice
Department, which charged restraint of trade and filed a complaint that
would take two years to work its way through the courts. The decision,
handed down by U.S. District Court Judge Allan K. Grim in Philadelphia
on November 12, 1953, was momentous. Though Grim disallowed
constraints in certain peripheral areas, prohibiting the blacking out of
radio broadcasts, he preserved the league's right to black out telecasts of
home games, and all other league games when the home team was
playing at home.
Television riches did not immediately flow to the National Football

League. There would be more trouble to come, and there were still a
scant few teams making regular profits. But with the example of the
Rams’ ill-fated home television policy in 1950 as a prod, and the Grim
decision as a covenant, pro football's policy toward television had been
established. While baseball continued to thrash about without a policy,
the NFL had succeeded in realizing another means of revenue, and
figured out how to do so without threatening its most important source
of income, the gate. That combination was a crucial one, setting the
stage for the league's steep ascent through the next two decades.

5 Baltimore

"There has been a lot of talk in recent years to the effect that
professional football is a dying sport in this country,” wrote Sport
magazine in an unsigned editorial in the October 1952 issue. “Pro
football never has been able to sell itself completely to the fans who are
so wild over the collegiate version of the sport. Many people stubbornly
insist upon regarding football as a rahrah game which isn't the same
when you take away the rah-rah.”
The view that the pro game remained a marginalized sport, inferior to
its college counterpart, was still commonly held in the early ’50s, and
was somewhat understandable, in light of the upheaval the league
endured since the dissolution of the AAFC. Attendance was stagnant, still
unable to match the average crowds of 30,000 that had turned out in
1946 and 1947, and a franchise failed in each of the first three seasons
of the decade. It was the darkness before the dawn in the growth of pro
football. And when the league's itinerant orphan franchise finally found
a home in 1953 it was, oddly enough, right back where it started the
decade, in abject failure.
When the NFL and the AAFC announced their “merger” in December
1949, it was clear that the Browns and 49ers, the league's two most
successful teams, would be joining the NFL. But the identity of the third
team was less obvious. Only seven clubs had played in the AAFC's final
campaign, and because of the presence of NFL teams in New York,
Chicago, and Los Angeles, there was no chance that any of the AAFC
franchises in those cities would be chosen. That left either the Buffalo

Bills or the Baltimore Colts. Buffalo had the strongest support, and the
better team—having played for the AAFC title in 1948 and in a playoff
game in 1949. But NFL owners were leery about bringing in a city with
such severe winters; others felt it wasn't large enough to support pro
football.
So the selection was Baltimore, despite a 1-11 record and $90,000 in
losses in 1949, prompting the team's original owner, Bob Rodenburg, to
throw in the towel. Somehow, the dismal Colts still drew 23,000 fans per
game in 1949— nearly equaling the NFL's average attendance for that
season—at a time when attendance was down 30 percent throughout the
AAFC, due to Cleveland's dominance. Adding three teams created a
nightmare in scheduling with the thirteen-team league, since an odd
number of teams meant one club would be out of action each week.
Trucking magnate Abraham “Shorty” Watner, a man with a gift for
gab and euphemism (he once referred to the cemetery he owned as a
“series of underground bungalows”), stepped in to buy the Colts
franchise, vowing, “I will underwrite the team for two years, I will take
any losses and I will give all profits to worthwhile local charities.
Baltimore is in the big leagues to stay!”
But after another one-win season, in which the team averaged barely
15,000 per game, Watner turned the club over to the league and the
Colts were dissolved, their players drafted off among the remaining
twelve franchises. In response, the city of Baltimore filed suit against
Watner and the NFL.
A year later, after the New York Yanks stumbled to a 1-9-2 record in
the 1951 season, and owner Ted Collins (better known, and much more
profitable, as singer Kate Smith's manager) decided to give up his
franchise, Bell invited Baltimore representatives to the 1952 meetings.
But most NFL owners were unconvinced, after the dismal performance in
1950, that Baltimore would support football. Instead, the owners
uncharacteristically looked to a new market in the Southwest.
Into the picture, with stereotypical Texan pride, came Giles and
Connell Miller, sons of the founder of the Texas Textile Mills, and wouldbe entrepreneurs determined to turn the game on its head with a flow of
schemes that would match the state's grandiose reputation. The

franchise, granted in January 1952, would be called the Dallas Texans,
and the Miller brothers crowed about possible innovations: players
introduced to the Cotton Bowl crowd on horseback; a gun holster design
sewn onto the team's game pants; substitutes running on the field
carrying the Texas state flag, presenting it to the player being replaced,
who would then transport it back to the sideline.
None of those ideas were realized, nor were the wishful-thinking
rumors, published in the Dallas Morning News just days after the Texans’
purchase was announced, that the team was “going to trade the three
Negro players for one outstanding performer.” But how a still segregated
city would react to an integrated team was a hot topic; as difficult as it
was for the home team's black players and fans, it was worse for visitors,
as Dallas's Jim Crow laws maintained segregation in all the city's hotels.
To handle publicity for the new team, the Miller brothers recruited Te
x Maule to come to Dallas as the team's PR man, with a guarantee that
he could, as Schramm had in Los Angeles, work his way up to general
manager duties. (Back in Los Angeles, Maule's position as publicist had
been filled when Schramm hired Pete Rozelle, the Compton College
student who'd helped with the Rams’ first training camp in California in
1946.)
Shortly after arriving in Dallas, Maule found a wayward circus
masquerading as a football team. The coach was the vastly entertaining
but overmatched Jimmy Phelan, whose love of football was often
eclipsed by his love of horse racing (he called off one practice before a
game in Los Angeles to take the team to Del Mar). Practices were barely
organized recess periods for adults, with Phelan drilling his quarterbacks
and backs while the linemen mustered impromptu volleyball games
using the goalpost crossbar for a net. After his years with Reeves and
Schramm and the sophisticated Los Angeles system, Maule was horrified
to see a team run so shabbily.
The Texans’ season opened at home on September 28, 1952, against
the New York Giants, expected to be a sizable draw because of the
presence of SMU alums Kyle Rote and Fred Benners. But the game was
the third one in the Cotton Bowl in as many days—SMU faced Duke
Friday night, Texas A&M played Oklahoma A&M Saturday—and the pros
drew just 17,499 fans for their opener.

In the following weeks, as dire reports filtered back to the league
offices in Philadelphia, it quickly became apparent that pro football in
Texas was a fiasco. Typical of the underwhelming response that greeted
the pro game in Dallas was the decision by one paper, the Fort Worth
Press, to assign a twenty-year-old writer to the Texans’ beat. “I remember
the Texans vs. the 49ers, and Hugh McElhenny running wild in the rain,”
said Bud Shrake, who took breaks from his homework while attending
classes at TCU to cover the Texans. “And I remember looking down from
the press box—and could not see one single fan in the stands. Those few
who were in attendance had gathered under the overhang to get out of
the rain. Art Donovan and Gino Marchetti were joking in the locker
room that if the fans gave ’em any shit they could go into the stands and
whip the whole crowd.”
The Texans played what would turn out to be their final home game in
the Cotton Bowl November 9 against the Los Angeles Rams, in front of a
crowd generously listed as 10,000. Prior to the game, Tex Schramm
received a call from Bell in Philadelphia, ordering him, “Don't you leave
that office until you get your check.”
And so it ended quickly. The Dallas Citizens Council refused a bailout
loan of $250,000, and after Giles Miller placed an SOS to Bell—wiring
him on November 12 that the team could no longer operate—the league
took over the Texans. The players practiced for the last time in Dallas on
Thursday, November 13, after which they boarded a plane—bade
farewell by a weeping Giles Miller, who had lost $225,000 in less than a
season—and departed to Detroit, for a 43–13 loss to the Lions.
The team never returned to Dallas, but instead, with a chastened Bell
and the league assuming control of the franchise, was based for the rest
of the season in Hershey, Pennsylvania, the bucolic company town that
was the site of the Eagles’ training camp, an annual exhibition between
the Colts and Eagles, and a frequent stopover for West Coast teams on an
East Coast jaunt.
While trying to determine what to do with the Texans, Bell had
another problem on his hands, the pending suit from the city of
Baltimore, over the Colts’ short-lived one-year stay in the NFL. Sensing a
settlement was not imminent and hoping to solve two problems at once,
Bell announced December 3, 1952, that the city of Baltimore could

inherit the Texans’ franchise, provided they could sell 15,000 season
tickets in the next month. The city immediately swept into action,
holding all manner of dinners, drives, and auctions to raise the funds. It
was one of the early signs of a phenomenon that pro football would see
frequently in the coming decades: sports fans convinced that the very
existence of a franchise gave the city itself a measure of national prestige
and identity. By early January, the drive had sold 15,755 season tickets
and raised $300,000.
Though Baltimore had achieved its goal and had $300,000 in the
bank, it still didn't have an owner. Bell had been pestering his summer
neighbor in Margate City, New Jersey, the mercurial millionaire Carroll
Rosenbloom, to take the club. Rosenbloom began his career working in
his father's Marlboro Shirt Company, then made his own millions during
World War II with the Blue Ridge Manufacturing Co., which made denim
for military work uniforms. He had played on one of the Penn football
teams for which Bell was an assistant coach, and though he was fond of
his old mentor, he insisted that he was too busy with his other interests.
But Bell kept leaning on his old friend, insisting Rosenbloom was the
only man who could give the franchise the stability that the city
deserved. Bell finally settled the impasse with his usual mixture of
decisiveness and gruff charm. Calling Rosenbloom on the night of
January 11, Bell said, “Carroll, you're the new owner. I just announced
it.”
The sales terms were accommodating, requiring only $25,000 of the
$200,000 price tag up front, and the rest of the payments scheduled to
be paid, without interest, over the next eight years. Rosenbloom
relented, and agreed to assume 51 percent ownership of the franchise
(with four Baltimore businessmen taking the other 49 percent), provided
Bell could find him a general manager to handle the day-to-day affairs of
the club. Bell chose Don Kellett, the director of operations at WFIL-TV in
Philadelphia. Baltimore was back in the business of pro football.
Instead of the old silver-and-green, the Colts wore blue-and-white, as
had the Texans. In fact the capes the players wore on the sidelines were
the same as those worn in Dallas, with a Colts patch sewn onto the back,
covering the word “Texans.” The team got off to a 3-2 start, proving
again the wisdom of Bell's balanced scheduling philosophy, only to lose

its last seven games, being outscored 45–2 by Los Angeles and 45–14 by
San Francisco on the season-ending West Coast swing. Despite the poor
performance, attendance was good, as the Colts drew more than 30,000
fans per game.

At the end of the season, first-year coach Keith Molesworth was
reassigned to the scouting department and Rosenbloom ordered Kellett
to search carefully to find the best coaching candidate in the game. No
one within pro football was surprised when Kellett came back with the
name of Browns assistant coach Blanton Collier.
Paul Brown was in a sullen mood by the time New Year's Day 1954
rolled around. For the third season in a row, his Browns had lost the NFL
title game. After the 24–17 rematch loss to the Rams in 1951, the
Browns suffered bitter title game defeats to Buddy Parker and his Detroit
Lions, who beat Cleveland 17–7 in 1952 and prevailed 17–16 in 1953.
The Browns still had been to the title game in every season of their
existence, but with the rise of the hardhitting, hard-drinking Lions, pro
football had a different prototype for success, a throwback club that had
all the talent of the Browns, but none of their stuffy discipline. As an
answer to “Automatic Otto” Graham, the Lions came up with Bobby
Layne, the commandeering quarterback from Texas. “When Bobby said
block, you blocked,” said teammate Yale Lary. “When Bobby said drink,
you drank.”
Yet beneath the surface, the Lions’ system showed signs of Brown's
influence. When Parker took over in 1951, he followed Brown's lead of
shorter, less physical practices, as well as the custom of gathering the
team in a hotel the night before home games. Just like Brown, Parker
developed his playbook from Shaughnessy's system from the Bears in the
early ’40s, then simplified to the extreme.
It was the mind-set that Brown had brought to the game earlier—how
to do things more efficiently than opponents—that led Parker to
introduce the principles and pace that would come to be known as the
“two-minute offense,” a hurried-up, scaled-down set of plays in the
closing minutes of each half, designed to make maximum use of sideline
patterns to conserve the clock, signals at the line to avoid huddling after
each play, and judicious use of timeouts. “I had noticed how so many
teams let down the two minutes before the half, and the last two

minutes of a game,” said Parker.“It seemed you could get things done
then that you couldn't in the other 56 minutes of play. So we drilled on
it. Every day.”
In the title game rematch at Detroit, Cleveland led much of the way
despite Graham's worst day as a pro (he was 2-of-15 passing), but the
Lions got the ball on their own 20 with 4:10 to play, trailing 16–10, and
Layne drove them down the field for a 17–16 win.
Brown, still coping with the anguish of his third straight title game
setback, gave Colts GM Kellett an icy reception when Baltimore called
about Collier. As Carroll Rosenbloom would explain later, “Well, Paul
Brown didn't want Collier to leave and refused to give me permission to
talk to him. I went to see Bert about that and he assured me I had a
perfect right to do so, whether Brown wanted me to or not, as long as it
was a step up. So I talked to Blanton, who was scared to death of Paul
Brown and did not want to be a head coach at that time, which was
strange.”
After a conflicted Collier asked to have his name removed from
consideration for the job, Rosenbloom soon received advice from Browns
minority owner Davy Jones that another Browns assistant, Weeb
Ewbank, also would make a fine head coach. With Bell already having
clarified the policy of interviewing assistants, there was nothing Brown
could do to stop Ewbank from talking with the Colts, or leaving when
the job was offered a week later. When he was first contacted by
Baltimore, Ewbank knew nothing of the Colts’ recruitment of Collier, so
he asked Brown whether he could talk to the team. “If I don't let you,
you'll never forgive me,” said Brown.
Brown feared that if coaches fully versed in the Browns’ system took
his organizational techniques to other teams, Cleveland would lose much
of its edge. He was right to be fearful.
Ewbank began by doing things exactly the way the Browns did them.
In the spring of 1953, the Colts and Browns swung a fifteen-player deal,
and players like Don Shula and Bert Rechichar, who had played under
Brown in Cleveland, recognized in the Ewbank system in Baltimore the
same terminology, the same practice structure, the same attention to
detail, as they'd seen in Cleveland. While many had seen him as a foil for

some of Brown's occasional barbs, Ewbank was no rube, and possessed a
quiet confidence in his own coaching skills. Upon accepting the Colts
job, he predicted that within five years Baltimore would have a world
champion.

Art Donovan had heard that Ewbank had a reputation around the
league as “a tremendous coaching talent and a rat bastard.” He was
inclined to agree after his first meeting with Ewbank in Baltimore, when
the coach informed him he'd have to lose thirty pounds prior to training
camp. But Donovan was starved for winning, and he responded,
flourishing under the meticulous coaching of Ewbank.
As it happened, Collier wouldn't remain long with the Browns. Just
days later Paul “Bear” Bryant left the University of Kentucky to take over
the head coaching job at Texas A&M, and the school sought Collier. It
was the one job that the Kentuckian Collier would consider at the time,
and on February 11, 1954, after meeting with Brown at his winter home
in Fort Myers, and a sleepless night of consideration, Collier accepted
the job.
But he did so with a heavy heart, as a letter he wrote to Brown a few
days later made clear. “The personal depth of our relationship I cannot
discuss in a sane manner,” Collier wrote. “As always, I choke up like
some kid, so you will have to guess at the extent of my feelings. As to
the technical phase of our relationship, I want you and everyone else to
know that anything I have ever done in football is a result of the
opportunities you have given me.”
While Brown felt abandoned, all was not immediately lost. In the short
term, the aging Graham would carry the Browns back to the summit,
and the team routed Detroit, 56–10, in the 1954 championship contest,
as Graham threw three touchdown passes and ran for three more. The
Browns took a 35–10 halftime lead and never faltered. He walked off the
field, accepted the MVP award, and announced his retirement.
While the Browns—a model of consistency—were facing the prospect
of life without their leader Graham, the Rams were trying to figure out
why their talented club could be so frustratingly inconsistent. Much of
the tumult started at the top, where coach Joe Stydahar, so fatigued
after the 1951 championship that he was hospitalized for stress, grew

convinced that his longtime friend and key assistant Hamp Pool was
trying to undermine him. After losing 37–7 to the Browns in the 1952
season opener, Stydahar went to Reeves with an ultimatum, that either
he or Pool had to go. Reeves declined to fire Pool, so Sty-dahar quit, and
Pool—who was already drawing up game plans for both the offense and
the defense—became the new head coach of the defending champs. After
an 0-2 start, Pool settled the team and the Rams won eight straight,
before losing to Detroit in a playoff for the Western Conference title.
In 1953, they swept the Lions, but suffered two close losses to their
archrival, the San Francisco 49ers, costing them the division title. The
all-California games were becoming a major attraction, drawing a pro
record crowd of 77,648 in 1952, breaking that record with a crowd of
85,865 to the L.A. Coliseum in 1953, and breaking it again in 1954, as
93,553 watched the two teams tie, 24–24.
In those years, Schramm grew to admire the organizational vision of
Reeves, while at the same time loathing his weaknesses. There were
times when Reeves was brilliant, a keen, focused executive, at once wry
and reserved, able to pinpoint a problem and work doggedly until a
solution emerged. And then, inevitably, there would come a night when
Schramm would get a call from Reeves, phoning from Kiernan's or some
other nearby tavern, his voice lilting but slurred, asking casually if
Schramm might want to join him on the next plane to Ireland. “And he'd
be gone, just like that,” said Schramm. “Nobody would hear from him
for days on end. It was the most maddening damn thing.”
Schramm soon recognized that, whatever else his talents and defects
were, Reeves was a binge drinker with a dark soul and an unhappy
marriage. His drinking made an already stressful situation in Los Angeles
all the more volatile, and Schramm was convinced that his boss was
drunk when he ordered the firing of Pool after the 6-5-1 season of 1954.
Indeed, by the time of the Pool firing, Reeves was about to hire his
eighth coach in fifteen seasons. But the Pool firing wasn't without basis:
while undeniably a skilled tactician, Pool had lost the support of some of
the players and had a difficult, standoffish relationship with the growing
L.A. press corps (despite PR man Pete Rozelle's frequent entreaties to be
more accommodating to the writers).

After the firing, Reeves asked Schramm to begin a nationwide hunt for
the best coaching prospect he could find. Schramm called Bud Wilkinson
at Oklahoma, Red Blaik at Army, Red Sanders at UCLA, and heard one
name over and over again. “Everybody I spoke to talked about this guy
Sid Gillman at Cincinnati,” said Schramm.“There were rumors that the
only reason he hadn't gotten a bigger job offer was because he was
Jewish. Well, that wasn't a problem for us.”
There were plenty of rumors about the hyper-competitive, irascible
Gillman, and some of them were true. He really did spend hours on end
in the dark in his office, not just watching films but splicing them into
different thematic reels, looking at how players from different teams
executed the same moves or pass patterns. He actually had sent one of
his assistants, Jack Faulkner, out to the campus of the University of
Nevada in the summer of 1948 posing as a walk-on to earn a spot on the
team and collect information about Cincinnati's season-opening foe. And
though they would develop a civil relationship in later years, Paul
Brown was convinced that Gillman had once sneaked away from a
speech at one of Brown's clinics and pilfered a playbook from the team's
coaching office.
Gillman looked like the put-upon father of some ’50s-era situation
comedy. In his natty suits and trademark bow tie, pacing the sidelines,
chainsmoking, and barking behind his Wayfarer sunglasses, he emanated
a kind of flinty cosmopolitanism. Like so many others in the sport,
Gillman was a football obsessive. Unlike them, however, he seemed to
have countless other paths he might have chosen. The son of a movie
theater owner who grew up in Minneapolis, the gifted musician was
seemingly bound for law school, but before he left for college, he fell in
love with football, then played his last two years of college under Ohio
State's legendary Francis “Close the Gates of Mercy” Schmidt. Schmidt's
innovative offensive ideas awoke in Gillman a kind of consuming
intellectual curiosity, and Gillman stayed on after graduation to work as
Schmidt's assistant.
Preparing to embark on his honeymoon, he convinced his bride,
Esther, to go to Chicago to watch the College All-Stars practice instead,
and shortly thereafter, even as the couple was living as frugally as
possible, Gillman spent $15 to buy a used 35mm projector that would

allow him to watch game film. He also arranged to have his father,
uncle, and brother smuggle football film clips from the newsreels at the
Minneapolis theaters they managed. On the Sunday morning of the Pearl
Harbor attack, Sid Gillman was already in his office, watching game film
for the next season.

By 1954, he'd amassed a long list of rivals, as well as a 50-13-1 record.
Dan Reeves was impressed, and hired him.
Gillman took the use of film study to new areas, separating game films
into isolated reels for offense and defense, then cutting those further to
concentrate on specific plays and situations. With his background in
movie theater production, he understood not just how to operate a
projector but how to cut and splice film. Squirreled away in his office
with a film cutter and a handheld splicer, he'd cut a piece of film, stick a
piece of masking tape to it, scrawl a rushed label onto the tape, then
tape it onto any flat surface in his office. Gill-man's work with film
became so intense that the Rams eventually hired a fulltime assistant in
charge of film, a Southern California cinematographer named Mickey
Dukich, who brought an electric splicing machine that allowed Gillman
to work faster and in more organized form. Suddenly, he could quickly
assemble a reel of all the down-and-out routes that Tom Fears ran in a
previous season, or all of the Bears’ plays from a certain formation.
Instead of merely seeing a diagram of a play written by their coach on
the chalkboard, Gillman's players were now able to see themselves, and
others, repeatedly on film, using the repetition of visual evidence as the
first step to teaching. Watching the previous season's film of the Rams’
games, Gillman was amazed by the array of moves used by Tom Fears.
“We were just beginning to understand how ‘moves’ are made by a
receiver,” he'd explain later. “Fears was one of the greatest ‘move’ men
in the history of the game. He didn't have much speed, but he could turn
’em on their heads. We studied Fears and we began to coach what he
was doing.”
In his first season, 1955, Gillman's Rams were a charmed, inspired
squad. Though his offense was considerably less explosive than Pool's
1954 squad (scoring 54 fewer points, rushing for 307 fewer yards, and
passing for nearly 1,000 fewer yards than the previous season), Gillman's
team was sound and competitive. And with a late charge, they won the

Western Conference title. In a gleeful Rams locker room, Gillman
allowed himself a bit of a boast. “Where has this been all my life?” he
exclaimed. Schramm fixed him with a look and warned him, “Sid, it's
not always going to be this easy.”

And it wasn't. A week later in the NFL title game, the Browns rolled
over the Rams, 38–14. It was a perfect coda for Otto Graham, whom a
desperate Brown had coaxed out of retirement at the beginning of the
1955 season, after Cleveland lost to the College All-Stars at the start of a
1-5 exhibition season. After looking rusty in a season-opening loss to the
Redskins, Graham was brilliant the rest of the season, then masterful in
the title game victory. The win fulfilled a vow Graham had made to
Brown four years earlier when, walking off the field after Cleveland's
24–17 loss to the Rams in the 1951 title game, he told his coach, “I'll
make this up to you, Paul, I promise you that.” Graham retired for good
after the 1955 season; he had played ten seasons and led Cleveland to
ten championship games, winning all four in the AAFC and three out of
six in the NFL.
Brown knew that his team would no longer have a free ticket into the
title game, as it had in the past. A competitive shift had occurred in the
larger, post-AAFC version of the NFL, as Brown's organizational mastery
was now widely imitated. And as other teams began employing some of
the same principles, they also began seeking their own distinct
advantages—the Rams with their scouting system, the Lions with their
simplified schemes and two-minute offense—and the margin of error
afforded the Browns became smaller and smaller.
With Collier at Kentucky and Ewbank across the sidelines in
Baltimore, Brown's network of top-notch aides was diminishing. Though
they would be replenished with quality assistants, he would never again
in Cleveland assemble a staff in which he had the same level of
confidence and comfort.
Ewbank and Gillman arrived as head coaches at a time when the
modern, recognizable two-platoon form of professional football—at once
violent and cerebral, increasingly reliant on the passing game and the
dueling strategies of opposing coaches—began to reach critical mass.
The game as played in 1955 had changed substantially from what it had
been even five years earlier: faster, more wide-open, and played at a

higher level of specialization and expertise than ever before. Free
substitution became a permanent part of the rulebook in 1950, and by
the middle of the decade, the two-way player was becoming an
anachronism, and the onset of the distinctly modern American concept
of specialization was in full bloom. Players now confined themselves to
either offense or defense, and were afforded the luxury of focusing on a
particular discipline during practice; they also remained fresher
physically during the games, which were thus played at a higher
intensity level. The emphasis on speed by a few teams in the late ’40s
began to be felt throughout the league as well. But these developments
were obscured by the growing awareness of the game's often casual
brutality. “Never have the pros played better, more exciting football,”
wrote Melvin Durslag in Sports Illustrated in 1955. “Never have division
races been tighter nor games more unpredictable. Yet hanging like a pall
over the otherwise brilliant play are two nasty words: ‘dirty football.’ ”
Reports of growing violence, cheap shots, and “hatchet men” had been
building for some time before a sensationalistic Life cover story
—“Savagery on Sunday”—in the fall of 1955. By the time the jury found
Life guilty of libel—awarding Eagles Bucko Kilroy and Wayne Robinson
$11,500 each—the league's reputation had undergone a serious beating.
A year later, the Bears’ Ed Meadows executed a brutal late hit on Bobby
Layne, in the game that helped Chicago edge Detroit for the Western
Conference title. A few weeks later, Sports Illustrated began a Q&A with
Bert Bell following the 1956 season with the leading question, “Do you
believe that pro football is dirty and getting dirtier?”
Even as the discussion of the game's violence was at its shrillest, the
sport was becoming safer. The catalyst of one important change can be
traced to a Cleveland game against San Francisco in 1953. Late in the
second quarter, after scrambling for a first down, Otto Graham's face was
slashed on a savage late hit by the 49ers’ Art Michalik. It took fifteen
sutures inside Graham's mouth, administered without novocaine at
halftime, to close the wound. In the second half, while completing 9 of
10 passes to rally the Browns to victory, Graham wore an inch-thick
piece of clear plastic to protect his mouth. Later in the season, the
Riddell sports equipment company came up with a plastic shield that
wrapped around the helmet, but the shield grew brittle and often

cracked in cold weather. (Graham disliked it because he couldn't spit
under it.)
That led to another innovation from Paul Brown. At the end of the
season, he visited Riddell's offices in Chicago, and described to technical
consultant G. E. Morgan what he wanted: “Give me something that will
fit across the front of a helmet and will be about as big as my little
finger, with tensile strength. I want it so it can withstand a stray foot, or
a deliberately thrown fist or elbow, and take away the inclination to
punch someone. But keep it light enough to weigh less than an ounce.”
With that description to work on, Morgan and his team of engineers
invented the BT-5 (the BT stood for “bar tubular”), a single gray bar
composed of rubber and plastic that the Browns began wearing on their
helmets in 1954. While modified facemasks had been fashioned before,
this was the first one to be mass-produced. The faceguards caught on
quickly, and became common in the NFL within the next two years.
(Brown, incidentally, had a contract with Riddell that paid him a royalty
for every mask sold, bringing him millions in the decades ahead.)
The other significant change was written into the rules in 1955, and
while it seemed merely a minor modification at the time, it proved to
have a powerful civilizing influence. Instead of defining a tackle as both
bringing down a runner and stopping his forward progress, the new rule
stipulated: “If a player touches the ground with any part of his body,
except his hands or feet, while in the grasp of an opponent and
irrespective of the grasp being broken, the ball is declared dead
immediately.” The immediate result of the rule was that it stopped much
of the vicious close-in fighting that took place after tackles had been
made, as runners tried to struggle free and keep running. It also
curtailed the routine piling on that took place at the end of tackles, with
defenders continuing to jump on a runner long after he was downed.
“The pileup is where most players are injured,” said Greasy Neale in
1954. “It's intentional and can be avoided. That's vicious football.”
It would be a while before public perception caught up with the
reality of the changing nature of the game. The combination of safety,
speed, and unlimited substitutions, along with the influence of
Cleveland's relatively cerebral style and the Rams’ wide-open attack,
meant that the game would inevitably become more complex. And with

that, the role of coaches and personnel scouts would become more
important than ever.
In 1955, after Ewbank had spent a year at the helm in Baltimore,
having built up one of the most extensive networks of scouts in the
country, the Colts opened the draft by winning the “bonus choice,” a
lottery system by which all the teams in the league were guaranteed to
get the top pick in the draft once every twelve years. The draft itself was
becoming one of the most important dates on the NFL calendar, with
teams following the Rams’ lead and devoting more time and resources to
preparing for it.
The Colts’ investment in scouting was still financially modest, the
team paying a loose collection of college assistants $50, plus a sport shirt
from Rosenbloom's Marlboro Shirt Company, for their annual reports. In
that 1955 draft, the Colts used the first pick for All-American
quarterback George Shaw of Oregon. The team was still not well known
nationally, and when the time came for him to negotiate, Shaw had to
ask the Colts what their colors were.
At a time when rosters were at thirty-three and only three to five
rookies might be expected to make a team, the Colts’ first six selections,
and twelve rookies overall (including three free agents) made the 1955
squad. It seemed that they had found their starting quarterback, center,
and running backs for the next ten years. Alan “The Horse” Ameche,
from Wisconsin, quickly won the starting running back job, along with L.
G. “Long Gone” Dupre of Baylor. Dick Szymanski, a center from Notre
Dame, looked to anchor the line, and the quarterback, Shaw, who went
on to win Rookie of the Year honors in 1955, was deemed a can't-miss
prospect.
While teams like the Rams and Colts were taking a more systematic
approach to scouting, other clubs still lagged behind. It wasn't
uncommon, when the draft was held in Philadelphia in the late ’50s, for
teams’ scouts to show up with a few magazines and news clippings and
park out by the pay phones at the Warwick Hotel lobby. “Guys would
come in with rolls of quarters, because in those days you didn't have
credit cards to make telephone calls,” said Gil Brandt, who did scouting
work for the Rams at the time. “So they would have a pick coming up,
and they'd run out to the pay phone and drop two dollars and twenty-

five cents in—ding, ding, ding— and call Pappy Lewis of West Virginia.
‘Hey, Pappy, who is the best offensive lineman you played against last
year?’ And that's how this kind of stuff took place, as recently as the late
’50s.”

Typical of the mind-set at the time was that held by the Steelers, who
had the bonus pick for the 1956 draft. Head coach Walt Kiesling, a
longtime Steeler on his third tour of duty as coach, had received a
rousing recommendation from a fellow coach about a Colorado State
player named Gary Glick, projected to be a defensive back in the pros.
As the scouting continued, in meetings with Steelers owner Art
Rooney, and his sons Dan and Tim, Kiesling kept returning to the
recommendation. “Kiesling kept pulling this letter out,” remembered
Dan Rooney,“and he keeps saying, ‘We need a defensive back. This kid
would be terrific.’ It's a bonus pick! And we never send anybody out to
see him. We never did anything. Talked to him on the phone, the kid
was wonderful—you know, why wouldn't he be? I mean, he might have
been a good fifth-round pick, but to take him as the first guy in the
country …”
When the draft was held the weekend following Thanksgiving, and the
Steelers announced their selection—“Gary Glick, Colorado State”—the
veteran Pittsburgh Press newspaper writer Bob Drum marched over to the
Steelers’ table and said, “Harry Stick! Where the fuck did you get this
guy?”
In the aftermath of the draft, Dan Rooney called the school to get film
of the player, something that the Steelers’ coaching staff had neglected
to do. When it arrived a week later, Dan invited his father up to the
Steelers’ scouting office to watch the film with him. “But my father
wouldn't go. He said, ‘I'm busy.’ So we go off to the eighth floor, where
we've got our personnel office, and we put the film on. And it's like, the
smallest college that you could imagine, dogs running out on the field.
So we come back down into my dad's office, and nobody says anything.
And I remember my father saying, ‘He didn't look very good, right?’ ”
While the Steelers were still shooting blanks, many of the other clubs
were hitting a higher percentage. In the first round that same year, the
Colts selected fleet future All-Pro Lenny Moore, from Penn State, who

would go on to add a measure of explosiveness to an already strong
attack. The Browns’ scouting system continued to thrive as well, as
Cleveland added nine players who'd have NFL careers in 1955, and eight
more in 1956.

But with teams in such close quarters, with competition honed to a
sharper edge than before across the league, every single personnel
decision took on greater importance. And a seemingly minor one that
Brown had made a year earlier, in August of 1955, would come back to
haunt him.
From its earliest days, one of the credos of football was that
deprivation bred toughness. Coaches believed that boys with the most
difficult childhoods made the best football players. They were built of
tougher stuff, more willing to administer and accept pain, more willing
to sacrifice for the good of the whole, to find a familial bond in football.
John Unitas was one of the tough ones. He had been just five years old
when his father died of pneumonia in 1938, leaving him and his three
siblings to be raised by their mother, Helen, who took over the family's
coal delivery business in Pittsburgh, and got other work on the side,
from cleaning offices to accounting.
So Unitas quickly learned the value of work, earning a quarter at a
time by shoveling two tons of coal into his neighbors’ cellars.
Prematurely stoic, and undersized until a growth spurt in high school, he
was best known at an early age for being an excellent dribbler in
basketball and terribly shy away from the fields and courts. He could be
jovial, even a cutup, but it happened only with close friends and never in
a large social setting, where he maintained a kind of quiet, barely polite
detachment. On many a Friday night, Unitas would pick up his
sweetheart, Dorothy Hoelle, and take her and her friend to the
gymnasium for a school dance. He would drop them off, then wait in the
parking lot for a couple of hours; he didn't care for dancing, or crowds,
but he was determined that he would fulfill his obligations and escort his
girlfriend to the dance.
Unitas didn't see his first professional football game until September
1950, when his coach, Max Carey, brought him to the Browns-Eagles
game that opened the season in Philadelphia. At the time, he was a 5-

foot-10, 135-pound junior quarterback at St. Justin's. Under Carey, he
would blossom in his junior season, beating out senior Dan Rooney, then
attending the local power, St. Cecilia's, for All-City quarterback.
A year later, Unitas had grown an inch and gained ten pounds, and
was again an All-City performer. But there was little to indicate that he
was going to make it even as a college quarterback. He was dismissed as
too small during a tryout at Notre Dame (the Irish assistant sent Carey a
letter saying he thought Unitas would get hurt playing college football).
Indiana expressed, then lost, interest. He failed the entrance exam at
Pitt.
The lone school of consequence interested in Unitas was the University
of Louisville, where he earned a starter's job midway through his
freshman season and went on to lead a consistently undermanned team
through two winning seasons, before an academic scandal resulted in
fifteen players transferring from Louisville. With the decimated squad,
Louisville won just five games in Unitas's last two years, and the modest
buzz from pro scouts all but vanished. Still, Browns assistant Dick
Gallagher told Unitas he'd be drafted by Cleveland if he was available in
the later rounds. Instead, Pittsburgh took the hometown boy in the ninth
round of the 1955 draft.
That summer of 1955, Unitas reported to training camp for his
hometown Pittsburgh Steelers. It was a rude awakening. At the Steelers’
training camp in Olean, New York, he was overwhelmed by the
cliquishness of the veterans, who after a few days started calling him
Clem, after the country hayseed character Clem Kadiddlehopper created
by comic Red Skelton. The hazing he might have expected; the lack of
professionalism he didn't. When Unitas asked for the daily whites—
socks, T-shirt, shorts, and an athletic supporter that players wore under
their uniform in practice—the Steelers’ trainer told him to rummage for
them himself from what was lying in a large pile on the floor of the
locker room. After morning practices, a player had to hang his soaked
whites on a big hook by his locker, hoping the clothes would dry by the
afternoon session. When Unitas asked about getting his ankles taped
before practice, he was told that players didn't get taped unless they
were hurt.
Steelers head coach Walt Kiesling found little to like in Unitas,

particularly since competition was so intense on the thirty-three-man
roster, and with starter Jim Finks, versatile Te d Marchibroda (who also
handled the punting duties), and fellow rookie Vic Eaton, Kiesling paid
Unitas little mind. Through five exhibition games, Unitas never took a
snap.

Meanwhile, Art Rooney's sons were going crazy. “His accuracy was
incredible,” recalled Dan Rooney, who by then was overseeing the
training camp while his father spent the month of August at horse tracks.
“I'd watch him throw for hours and it made me sick to think Kies wasn't
giving him a look. My brother, Timmy—he was fifteen then—wrote my
father a letter telling him Unitas was not only the best passer in camp
but probably the best passer in football but the coaches weren't giving
him a fair shot. My dad wrote back from Aqueduct or someplace and
said, ‘Why don't you leave the coaching to the coaches?’ ”
Kiesling's mind was made up; he found Unitas thick and withdrawn,
too slow to grasp the Steelers’ playbook, that he set up too slowly in the
pocket, and couldn't find secondary receivers. On September 5, a full
three weeks before the beginning of the regular season, Unitas was cut.
When Kiesling called him into his office to tell him he was being
released, a bristling Unitas was defiant, openly challenging the decision.
“Y'know, it'd be different if I screwed up,” Unitas told him, “but you
never gave me an opportunity to play.”
“Unitas was totally ignored,” said Dan Rooney. “They never did
anything with him. It wasn't a question of misjudging him. They would
have had to judge him first. But they never did a thing with him.”
Unitas received bus fare back to Pittsburgh, but hitchhiked home
instead, where Dorothy (by now his wife) was waiting with news that
she'd bought tickets for their families to see the Steelers’ opening home
game the following week. That evening, they sat around in their living
room, neither speaking, neither quite sure what to do next.
Within a day, his old high school coach, Max Carey, would provide
consolation and direction. The Browns, without the retired Otto Graham,
had lost to the College All-Stars, and were clearly desperate for
quarterbacking help. Carey persuaded Unitas to send Paul Brown a
telegram, asking for a tryout in Cleveland. (Unbeknownst to Unitas, Art

Rooney had called Brown at the behest of his son. “Dan says this Unitas
is a good lookin’ kid,” he said. “Maybe you guys should pick him up.”)
By that time, though, Brown had already made his move, coaxing Otto
Graham back for one more season. Brown wired Unitas back, telling him
that since Graham was returning for one final season, the Browns
wouldn't need any help at quarterback that year, but if he wanted to,
Unitas was welcome to come to training camp with the Browns the
following July.
With that shred of hope, Unitas kept his dreams alive. He spent the
next few months working construction in Pittsburgh, spending six days a
week as the “monkey man” atop a pile driver, part of a road construction
crew laying the foundation for a mill in Aliquippa. On Thursday nights
he'd drive to the rock-strewn dirt field next to Arsenal Street School, and
play with the Bloom-field Rams, a semipro team that played once a week
in the Steel Bowl Conference, an array of Industrial Belt semipro clubs.
At $6 per game, Unitas was playing football. Paid in cash by team owner
Chuck Rogers in the basement of Parise's Dairy, just across the street
from the field, Unitas brought his $6 home to his wife, telling her,
“Dotty, don't spend this on bills. Spend it on something nice for
yourself.”
By the end of Weeb Ewbank's second season with the Colts in 1955,
only twelve players remained from Keith Molesworth's Colts squad of
1953. Baltimore's team was younger, bigger, faster, more talented, and,
with a 5-6-1 record, starting to show signs of coming together. During
that fall of 1955, Ewbank received a postcard from Pittsburgh, unsigned
but addressed to him, which read, “There's a boy in sandlot ball here,
playing for the Bloomfield Rams, who's worth looking at. His name's
John Unitas.” He later mentioned Unitas to Colts GM Don Kellett, who
also had him on a list of possible free agents. One of the few places the
team felt secure was at quarterback, with bonus pick George Shaw
coming off his impressive Rookie of the Year season in 1955. But when
backup quarterback Gary Kerkorian told Kellett that he was planning to
retire so he could attend law school, the GM began combing the free
agent lists, and came across the name of Unitas, whom Ewbank had
mentioned earlier.
In February 1956, Kellett called Unitas. What would go down in

legend as an 80-cent phone call was actually two 84-cent long-distance
calls, one in the afternoon, when Dorothy Unitas told Kellett her
husband wasn't home from work yet, and another later in the evening,
when Unitas answered the phone. Kellett invited him to come work out
for Ewbank the following week, with the understanding if he passed
muster then, he'd be invited to training camp, and offered a $7,000
contract if he made the team.
While some teams, most notably the Rams, had started using movie
cameras as a technical aid during practices, the Colts didn't have such
equipment. When Unitas and some other free agents came for their
workout, they played on an unmarked field next to the Clifton Park pool
in Baltimore, and an assistant snapped still photos of all the players, to
study for later evaluation.
“We took pictures of John under center, and again when he set up and
right at the last when he followed through,” recalled Ewbank. “That was
the thing we noticed right away, the way he followed through. It was
exceptional. The pictures showed it clearly. His arm went through so far
that he turned his hand over like a pitcher…. When he followed through
his fingers turned over and you could see the back of his hand.”
Ewbank told Unitas to work on keeping the nose of the football up on
short passes, to get more loft on his long passes, and to be in camp in
July. Unitas could have held out and gone to the Browns’ camp, but the
Colts were more aggressive, and Cleveland hadn't been in touch since
Brown's short note the previous August. With only one proven
quarterback in Baltimore, Unitas sensed his chances for success were
better there. Thus would the relative fortunes of the Cleveland Browns
and Baltimore Colts be forever changed.
From the first day of Colts training camp, that July 1956 in
Westminster, Maryland, Unitas realized that he'd found a home. He felt
welcomed by the Colts, comfortable in an environment that was much
more nurturing for players. Dick Nyers, a rookie kick returner, met him
at the airport and drove him to the Colts’ offices, where they got a ride
to training camp. In the locker room, the whites were rolled up and
waiting by each player's locker. When the veterans arrived days later,
Unitas found a completely different atmosphere. “These guys would take
you aside and try to work with you and help you,” he said. “George

Shaw was happy to help me with anything I asked of him. You could see
Gino Marchetti taking a defensive end and showing how to work. Yo u
never got any of that kind of treatment in Pittsburgh.” Unitas still didn't
cut a very convincing figure on the football field. The Giants had first
faced him in that 1956 preseason, and Unitas appeared so ungainly
trotting out onto the field that day that Giants quarterback Charlie
Conerly looked over to Frank Gifford on the New York sideline and said,
“Look at that goofy sonofabitch.”
But as would be said about him hundreds of times after then, they
noticed that Unitas got the job done. The first glimmer came in the
team's annual blue-white intrasquad scrimmage in Hershey,
Pennsylvania. Shaw had been out with the flu, and Unitas started for the
white-jersey second squad, passing for three touchdowns. Late in the
game, the staff asked him to switch to a blue jersey, to try to rally the
team, which he did, as the game ended 20–20. On the closing drive, he
made his first pass to the Colts’ second-year end Raymond Berry.
The two men came from vastly different backgrounds—Berry's father
had been a coach at the Paris, Texas, high school—but they shared a
relentless desire to master the game. With Unitas, there was the endless
perfection of the technique that Ewbank constructed on his carefully
annotated four-page sheets of quarterback's instructions. Concerned
about his tendency to throw the ball too low, Ewbank during one
training camp took to stringing a volleyball net up across the scrimmage
line, and having Unitas throw his arsenal of passes over it.
But it was not all instruction. Unitas possessed qualities that were
unteach-able and inimitable. Teammates and opponents alike soon
noticed his absolute fearlessness in the face of a pass rush, his
willingness to hold on to the football before releasing a pass until the
last possible instant, and to do so without flinching. He also had a habit,
on deeper routes, of deceiving defenders by rolling his shoulders as if
winding up for a pass, away from the side of the field he intended to
throw to, then rolling them back toward his chosen receiver. More
deceptive than the standard pump-fake, the move impressed Ew-bank
enough for him to try to teach it to the other quarterbacks. But it
required a dexterous, loose-jointed coordination, and no one else on the
team could master it.

If Unitas was a diamond in the rough, Berry was a self-polished stone.
Decades before it became common in pro sports, he'd developed his own
elaborate set of habits and methods, which set him apart from anyone on
the team. “He went to bed at half past eight, to make sure he got enough
sleep,” remembered Unitas, “and when he got a pair of uniform pants
that fit just the way they should, he insisted on hand-washing them
himself, so they wouldn't be given out to some other player after laundry
was done. He carried a football with him every place he walked the
camp grounds, so he would get the feel of the ball and keep his fingers
supple enough to catch any passes that might be thrown to him.” Berry
would develop, both on his own and later in 1958 with the help of
receivers coach Bob Shaw, an arsenal of eighty-eight distinct maneuvers
designed to elude defenders. And in training camp and throughout the
season in practices, as the shadows grew longer and the light grew
dimmer, Unitas and Berry could be found out on the field for thirty
minutes or more after all of their teammates had gone inside.
The Colts were 1-2 when they traveled to Chicago on Sunday, October
21, to face the Bears in Wrigley Field. Leading the game 20–7, Colts
quarterback George Shaw was injured, tearing ligaments being tackled
by Chicago defensive tackle Fred Williams. Unitas came in and the first
ball he handed off was a fumbled exchange, leading to a touchdown. His
first pass was intercepted by the Bears’ J. C. Caroline, and returned for a
touchdown. The Bears ran away with the game, 58–27. But the next
week, Unitas led the club to a 28–21 win over the Packers, and there
was evidence to suggest that the team was rallying around him.
Ewbank would remember Unitas taking control almost instantly, and
having both the will and the presence to be able to stridently criticize his
teammates if they weren't performing. “Goddammit, this is no fun back
here,” Unitas would say. “You should try throwing that ball, the way
you're letting them through.”
On November 11, 1956, Unitas led the Colts into Cleveland, where
Baltimore won, 21–7, in a homecoming of sorts for Ewbank. It was the
Colts’ first win over Cleveland in seven games, dating back to the AAFC.
When an elated Ewbank trotted across the field to shake hands with his
old mentor, Brown wasn't there.
Later that week, back in Baltimore, equipment manager Fred

Schubach wondered aloud when George Shaw would return from his
injury. The big defensive end Gino Marchetti fixed Schubach with a look,
and said, “He's never going to be the quarterback again. Unitas is the
quarterback.”

6

On Any Given Sunday

S

hortly after a rain-drenched day in early October 1955, when the
New York football Giants drew a crowd announced as 7,000 to the
Polo Grounds for a game against the Chicago Cardinals, owner Tim Mara
received a call from Bert Bell in Philadelphia. The commissioner told
him that two unnamed Texas oilmen were willing to pay $1 million for
the Giants—but only if they could move the team's games to Yankee
Stadium.
Mara wasn't selling, but he was intrigued by the prospect of a new
venue. The Polo Grounds, with its elongated dimensions, lacked the
amenities or cachet of Yankee Stadium. But what had kept the Giants
from considering a move earlier was Mara's ongoing war with Yankees
owner Dan Topping, which dated back for more than a decade, when
Topping owned an NFL franchise. Thirty years earlier, Tim Mara had
mused that any franchise in New York ought to be worth $2,500. After
Bell's call, he consulted with his sons, Jack and Wellington, and
conceded that if someone was willing to pay $1 million for putting the
Giants into Yankee Stadium, they probably should consider doing it
themselves. Jack Mara made the overtures and, early in 1956, the Giants
signed a contract to play their games across the Harlem River, in the
Bronx.
While pro football was gathering momentum throughout the ’50s, and
crowds were growing in Baltimore and Cleveland and Los Angeles, the
most striking changes in the decade occurred in New York City, where a
confluence of trends contributed to a greater profile for the sport than it

had ever enjoyed. After Steve Owen's twenty-three-year tenure as head
coach ended with a 3-9 mark in 1954, the Giants handed the job to the
laid-back Arkansan Jim Lee Howell, who presided over an 8-4
turnaround in 1955. In 1956, the charmed first season in Yankee
Stadium, the Giants went 8-3-1 and were at home when they won their
first title in twenty years, blowing out Chicago, 47–7, on a frigid,
slippery field.
All over the city that fall, players who for years had been ignored or
made to feel inferior to their baseball counterparts were getting the sort
of VIP attention that had previously been the sole province of baseball
players. “I could tell a difference even then,” said halfback Frank Gifford
of the city's change in attitude in the wake of the 1956 success. “All of a
sudden instead of going to the dumps on the West Side, somebody would
be inviting you to dinner at Toots Shor's or ‘21’ or Al Shack's or Rose's or
Manuche's, it was just a different world.”
The dawning age of specialization could be seen in the Giants’ success,
off the field as well as on. Many on the team credited the team's
resurgence to the dynamic assistant coaching combination of Vince
Lombardi, who ran the offense, and Tom Landry, in charge of defense.
Head coach Jim Lee Howell was a delegator; Giants linebacker Sam Huff
would say he “never once saw him draw a play up on a chalkboard.”
Visiting Howell at work in 1958, Red Smith wrote, “Mostly he is the
administrator and the coordinator, and that apparently is the way to do
the job today. If the question is offense, Howell says, ‘Ask Lombardi
about that.’ Defense? Tom Landry is the man to see. U.S. Steel does fairly
well on that plan, but it is unorthodox in football and therefore suspect
by some.”
Tactically speaking, the two assistants had much in common. Both
were students of the expanding science of film study, not just for
evaluating their own players but for finding clues to an upcoming
opponent's philosophy and patterns.
Though they were the two best-known and most respected assistants
in pro football, Lombardi and Landry were never close. The Catholic
Lombardi was voluble and fiery, a man of vast charm but profane
tirades, whom Landry nicknamed “Mr. High-Low” for his radical mood

swings. Landry, a self-proclaimed born-again Christian who had flown
bomber missions in World War II, was balding, detached, and selfcollected, an industrial engineer who loved the solitude of extended
study sessions. Gifford saw “a lot of competition” between Lombardi and
Landry, and viewed it as a logical progression of the increasingly
specialized units themselves. “We didn't like [the defense] very much,
and they didn't like us much. And didn't really care. We were cliquey.”
The antagonism was felt on both sides of the ball, especially when New
York's offense was sputtering. Sam Huff, marching off the field after
another defensive stand, had been known to mutter to his offensive
counterparts taking the field, “Now get in there and hold ’em.”
Lombardi, who came to the Giants in 1953 from assistant coaching
jobs at Army and Fordham, ran the offense with a mixture of
fundamental willpower and unusual mental gymnastics. He convinced
the Giants to bring a Polaroid camera up to the press box, to provide
overhead views of the defensive alignments, which were then shuttled
down from the upper deck by Wellington Mara, who put the pictures
inside a sock weighted with a rock, then lowered them on a string to the
sideline. In 1956, he took to beginning games with his backup
quarterback, Don Heinrich, in the starting lineup, then spending the first
two or three series conferring with his number one quarterback, Charlie
Conerly, about the defensive alignment and the plays that might work
best. Then, after a quarter or so (or even, on one occasion, as long as
three quarters), he would insert his “starter.”
Lombardi also incorporated the intricacies and exquisite logic of “rule
blocking,” a system in which each offensive lineman's assignment on a
particular play was dependent upon the alignment of the defender in
front of him (an alignment that could, of course, change in an instant
prior to the snap). An offensive guard's assignment might be different if
the man across from him was shaded to his right shoulder than if the
same man was four inches over, “face-up” on his nose. One of the
assistants on Red Blaik's staff at Army described rule blocking as “a
combination of Sanskrit, algebra and infantry tactics,” but it quickly
became standard procedure in the NFL, where Sid Gill-man in L.A. was
another proponent and innovator.
Most of all, Lombardi was a motivator, who used his intensity to

alternately intimidate and placate his players, driving them to higher
levels of performance. While Landry was unquestionably a brilliant
tactician, his spare, ascetic style left many of his players cold. “He never
made a comment about, ‘You're playing well’ or ‘You're playing terrible’
or ‘You're not doing anything,’ ” said Pat Summerall, traded from the
Cardinals to the Giants in 1958. “He just said, ‘You didn't do what I told
you’ and that was his simple way of correcting and praising. ‘You did
what I said, so we won.’ ”
The cornerstone of the Landry defense was the belief that finding
patterns in a team's play in previous games could help determine their
likely play selection in future games. Carefully charting the film he was
watching not just for different formations and plays, but the frequency of
plays and types of calls in certain down-and-distance situations, Landry
likely became the first coach in the game to intensively document an
opponent's tendencies to construct a game plan. For his players, Landry
converted this information into a series of reads or “keys,” in which they
responded to a certain formation or initial player movement with a
countermove based on a team's likely play-calling history in the two or
three earlier games Landry had studied on film.
What had emerged from Owen's umbrella defense was Landry's
modern variation, called the 4-3-4, or, simply, the 4-3. In this setup, the
middle guard moved three to five yards behind the line of scrimmage,
and became the middle linebacker. Huff, in that position, was the leader
of the defense, and one of the league's first purely defensive stars.
In an age when offenses were starting to spread out, the 4-3 offered
defenses more lateral mobility. And when Landry rubbed his stomach on
the sidelines, the linebackers, instead of lying in wait for the play to
develop, would charge into the backfield. The “blitz” or “red dog”
became one of the pro game's signature plays, an instance of the defense
taking a gamble on a par with the long bomb by the offense.
Brown's innovations had upped the ante of general organization and
planning throughout the league; the machinations of Landry and
Lombardi (along with a handful of other innovators, like Pool and then
Gillman in Los Angeles and Brown and Collier in Cleveland) would make
the game's strategy and tactics even more complex. And with the title in
1956, the Giants were on the front end of that change, and would begin

a glorious run that would last for nearly a decade.
But it was not so much the Giants themselves as the reaction to the
Giants, building throughout the late ’50s and early ’60s, that indicated
pro football had turned a corner.
For the advertising community in New York, brimming with young,
active execs and consultants tuned into the faster pace of the new media,
football held a visceral tug that other sports couldn't match. The word
they spoke about most often was “action,” and Madison Avenue's interest
translated beyond Sunday afternoons. For the first time, there were
commercial opportunities presenting themselves to players. Charlie
Conerly, the Giants’ quarterback, became friends with longtime Giants
season ticket holder Jack Landry, an executive with Philip Morris, who
helped him line up an endorsement deal with Marlboro cigarettes. Frank
Gifford landed a television pregame show and a news broadcasting spot.
Gifford also was recruited by an energetic ad agency exec named Homer
Groening for the Jantzen sportswear campaign, a major print push that
included athletes like Bob Cousy and Ken Venturi, but significantly, no
baseball players, since Groening wasn't a fan. (Homer Groening's son,
Matt, would go on to a career as a cartoonist and creator of The
Simpsons.)
The large, loud crowds that came to cheer the Giants on Sunday were
not just avid but also knowledgeable. They began cheering not only for
the offensive backfield stars but also for the Giants’ defense, shouting
“DEE! FENSE! DEE! FENSE!” during important stands, or repeatedly
chanting the names of Huff or Robustelli. Like fans in Cleveland and
Green Bay and other cities, bundling up to spend an afternoon in
ridiculously cold weather became a perverse point of pride, and a sign of
commitment and devotion.
Pro football had become, in the same vein as baseball, a sport for
serious fans. And, at the same time, it was becoming the flip side of
baseball—often urgent while baseball was often relaxed, strictly
regimented where baseball was at times meandering. Attending a
baseball game asked less of the fan, was never quite the ordeal that
football—with the frequent exhortations, concerted clapping, chants,

and stomping, attempting to sway both sides—had become. While
college fans had the identification for the alma mater to spur them on,
the relationship with a professional team and its fan base was a more
synthetic one. Yet the evidence, around the country in the late ’50s, was
that it was growing rapidly.
The league's surge in popularity didn't come in a vacuum, however,
nor without resistance. It is difficult to exaggerate the casual contempt
with which spectator sports were held in the collective consciousness of
many cultured Americans in the early 1950s. Though the games were
clearly gaining popularity across age groups and social classes, the mere
act of fandom still was frowned on by much of the cultural elite. Before
Sports Illustrated launched in 1954, an executive at Time Inc. wrote in a
memo that the likely audience for such a magazine would be made up of
“either juveniles or ne'er-do-wells.”
But that advice wasn't heeded, and SI itself would later help to change
the perception of the games themselves. In 1956, the magazine began
running regular stories by Tex Maule, who, after leaving the Rams for
his ill-fated stint as PR man for the Dallas Texans in 1952, worked as a
columnist on the Dallas Times Herald, then came to New York to become
the new magazine's pro football writer in 1956. Maule was hardly the
best writer at Sports Illustrated, but he was among the most expert, a
writer with strong connections throughout the league, who was as
intrigued as many fans with the point and counterpoint of gridiron
strategy. He was, almost unique at the time, a writer who could divine
many of the intricacies of the modern game without either mocking the
process or making light of his inability to fathom it. Almost
imperceptibly at first, more clearly later, the public began to understand
that the game was not all a matter of brute force. Television helped that
cause, in giving fans a better view of the action than they might have at
the game. And Sports Illustrated contributed as well, with Maule treating
the game and the league with a seriousness it hadn't always received in
the national press.
There were still stories arguing whether the pro game was more
entertaining than the college one, but by the late ’50s, few people were
questioning the pros’ proficiency. “I believe we began to convince people
that pro football was a logical extension of college football,” said Carroll

Rosenbloom, “a way for them to continue to follow their college heroes,
who otherwise would have graduated and never been heard from again.
Take Alan Ameche [the club's 1955 first-round draft choice from
Wisconsin]. They wanted to keep seeing him, and millions could, all
over the country.” Attendance, which had averaged 23,196 for the sixty
games of 1949, increased every year during the ’50s, and by 1959, the
league was averaging 43,617 for its seventy-two games.
Presiding over the league's ascendance, with an ever more assured
hand, was Bert Bell. By the beginning of the decade, he was viewed as
nearly indispensable by the owners.
“We're as much concerned about his health as Republicans are about
the health of the president,” said George Preston Marshall in 1954. Early
that year, when Bell collapsed at the Racquet Club in Philadelphia, his
doctors were worried about his diet and schedule, telling him to cut
down on his cigarette smoking and hours. As his health worsened and
pace quickened in 1957, Bert Jr. began to worry as well. In February of
1959, Bell suffered a mild heart attack, and convalesced at Lackinaw
Hospital just outside Philadelphia, vowing to cut back on cigarettes,
eggs, fat, and steaks. Before the league meetings that spring, league
treasurer Austin Gunsel furtively contacted several owners asking them
—at the behest of Bell's physician—to avoid the marathon late-night
sessions that typically marked previous league meetings.
Though he had matured in the job, and learned when to apply
pressure and when to act as conciliator, Bell's operational style had
changed little. He never flew, taking Pullman trains for road trips. In his
office, he sat behind a massive mahogany desk, with burn marks all
around the edges of the desktop, a product of Bell's placing lit cigarettes
on the desk during many of his lengthy telephone discussions. From the
office at Bala Cynwyd (pronounced bal-uh kin-wood), just across the
street from the Philadelphia city limits, to the phone with the long
extension cord in the front room at his home in the Narberth
neighborhood where he had lived since 1950, he routinely ran up
longdistance expenses in excess of $10,000 per year.
After more than a decade in Center City Philadelphia, Bell decided the
league office should be moved out of the city limits—where the onerous
wage tax lopped off 1.5% of every worker's income. The league chose a

modern building, close to a train stop, in Bala Cynwyd. The new office
put Bell even closer to Narberth.
Even in the last half of the ’50s, with the sport on the rise, the league
office was still a modest operation. Secretaries had come and gone, and
by 1958, when Bell's twenty-six-year-old son, Bert Jr., began working as
a clerk in the office, there was no dedicated secretary. The office was
instead filled with one-finger typists, not a major problem since almost
all of Bell's correspondence was by telephone. Once, asked by a lawyer
to see his correspondence with CBS, Bell replied, “I've never had any
correspondence with CBS. All our deals are made by telephone.” CBS
executive Edgar Scherick, who dealt with the commissioner extensively
throughout the ’50s, recalled, “Bell himself ran the whole goddamn
league out of his kitchen…. He'd call me up every morning, just as I was
soaping myself up in the shower, and we'd work out our arrangements
by telephone.”
The league's legal counsel was Bert's brother, Jack Bell, the
Pennsylvania Supreme Court justice. Austin Gunsel, formerly of the FBI,
was the treasurer and the league's de facto director of security, who
began the league policy of putting an ex-FBI agent on retainer in each
league city. Joe Labrum, who'd attended Penn with Bell, was the league's
publicist. Rounding out the office was Mike Wilson, director of officials,
and Harry Standish, Jr., the league's director of personnel (and Bell's
brother-in-law, married to the sister of Bell's wife), in charge of
approving player contracts. Standish kept a series of 3 × 5 note cards on
every player's contract, each one beginning with his handwritten words,
“This boy was …,” before a recitation of the round the player was
drafted in, how much he signed his contract for, and what bonuses were
in his contract. In many ways, Standish's contract note cards were the
most sophisticated organizational tool in the office. There was no
receptionist, no central file clerk, no typing pool. Many reporters would
find, when calling the league offices in the ’50s, that Bell himself might
answer the phone. Even when he didn't pick up the office phone, he gave
the staff instructions to patch all calls for him directly through.
Because of Bell's success, the league's rapid attendance growth, and
rising revenues, much dissent was muffled in the name of progress. Some
owners resented the scheduling. Others felt that Bell had a natural bias

for his closest friends among the owners. When the Bears’ Ed Meadows
bludgeoned Bobby Layne in the 1956 game that decided the Western
Conference title, many saw the lack of a fine as being a sign that Bell
was in George Halas's hip pocket. West Coast teams perceived a clear
regional bias. “It was the old guard, and every ruling would be in favor
of them,” complained Te x Schramm, with the Rams at the time. “That
shit got old fast.” But owners who strongly disagreed with Bell either
couldn't muster the support to defeat him on key issues, or else
eventually capitulated out of a combination of respect and peer pressure.
“When he wanted to get something done,” said the Colts’ Carroll
Rosen-bloom, “and he wasn't getting his way, Bert would sit there and
slowly take out his false teeth and lay ’em on the table. His face would
pinch up and he would look sooooo old, so tired, and he would start to
cry. He was a great crier. George Preston Marshall would be walking up
and down, screaming and exhorting everybody, and finally they would
see that Bert was crying and somebody would say, ‘For Chrissakes,
George, siddown, you're annoying Bert.’ ”
“The Fifties was a decade in which everybody became watchers
instead of doers,” said Tex Schramm. “Television meant the end of minor
league baseball as we had known it and also minor league
entertainment. Why pay to see a stage show with one big name and no
other talent, when you could turn on your TV and watch the best
entertainers in the world? I think this also signaled the end of
regionalism. People started thinking more on a national scale.” Leaving
behind what he viewed as a chaotic owners situation with the Rams in
1957, where Reeves and his partners were not communicating, Schramm
spent the end of the decade in the eye of the CBS Sports storm, as the
popularity of television and sports began to change. Schramm joined as
the lieutenant of Bill MacPhail, for whom CBS Sports had become
something of a personal fiefdom. In MacPhail, CBS found a man perfect
for the moment. He'd paid his dues, as a public relations man working
for the lowly Kansas City Athletics in 1955, and though he initially felt
like college football would be a better buy (because of the pageantry,
tradition, and sex appeal of cheerleaders), he was alert and open enough
to recognize the emerging appeal of pro football, as well as the untapped
potential of the Sunday afternoon telecast.

The number of television sets in the country had grown from 172,000
in 1948 to 25 million in 1954, the same year that the oversize perennial
photojournalism weekly Life lost 21 percent of its circulation over a sixmonth period. It was clear that television would transform the culture,
but few knew exactly how, and the thought that it would change the
perception of and the profile of sports was scarcely recognized.
Certainly, television featured plenty of sports in its early incarnations.
But as viewers around the country gravitated to sets, usually at the
corner tavern, they were watching either boxing or staged sports, like
wrestling or Roller Derby. Among team sports there was widespread
anxiety about the effect of television on the crucial gate that was the
lifeblood of sports leagues.
At CBS, the young, affable executive MacPhail (who had the title of
president of CBS Sports, though at the time no such distinct entity
existed) toiled with little support. “CBS had no reason to fool with
sports,” MacPhail said of the period.“CBS was so number one, overall,
that its prime time was inviolate. There was no way I could get
programming in there. I was the fifth wheel, the necessary evil. CBS
would spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to develop prime-time
pilots it would never use—and then ask, ‘Why do we have to do the
goddamn Gator Bowl?’ ”
Within much of the sports world, the aversion was mutual, as many
executives recoiled from the medium's effect on the box office. In
Brooklyn, Dodgers owner Walter O'Malley looked at his team's books
and realized the club was making essentially the same money in the
early ’50s as it had made during the war. “TV money was much larger of
course,” he recalled, “because we were televising nearly all of our
games. Our attendance at the ballpark was drastically down. And our
radio income was down. We were standing still, even though we had
won five pennants in those years. Five of them and we'd have been
positively bankrupt in five more years if we had stayed in Brooklyn. An
old and dear friend of mine, the late Frank Shaughnessy, who used to be
president of the International League, liked to say, ‘Radio whets the
appetite. Television satiates it.’ That was what happened in Brooklyn,
you see. Our people were TV-sated.”
While baseball struggled to make sense of its predicament, the NFL

moved quickly to embrace television on its own terms. Supported by the
Grim court decision to allow the league to black out games in markets
where NFL games were being played, the NFL by the mid-’50s had
codified its television policies. The blackout helped the home gate, and
the telecasting of all road games back to a team's home city increased
interest in the team and, in turn, helped promote the home gate as well.

By the early ’50s, the network schedules were full of news and game
shows in the morning, soap operas in the afternoon, and entertainment
in prime time. One time slot resistant to programming was Sunday
afternoon, which quickly became known as “the ghetto” within the TV
industry. For much of the ’50s, the schedule was dominated by CBS's
Emmy-winning Omnibus, a broad cultural show that featured such
highbrow entertainment as Chekhov plays, the Metropolitan Opera
staging Die Fledermaus, or Orson Welles as King Lear. Pro football would
soon change that.
In 1956, though NBC held the championship game, all twelve NFL
teams had individual deals with CBS or its affiliates. During that 1956
season, Bell continued building the series of arrangements that would
define the relationship between television and football in the future. In a
memo sent out to the league's twelve franchises in August 1956, the
commissioner advised the clubs, “This year the Columbia Broadcasting
System (CBS) and the local sponsors will present to the public all our
games on television, giving us our greatest opportunity to sell the
National Football League and professional football. Everyone must do all
in his power to present to the public the greatest games in football
combined with the finest sportsmanship.”
While each team negotiated its own deal independently, Bell had the
right to approve all the deals. The key to the marketplace was Rule 4(b)
in the standard National Football League team's television contract,
which stipulated that no game be broadcast into the home territory
(within seventy-five miles) of a team playing at home that particular
day.
Under Bell, the television networks were prohibited from showing
injuries or fights. This was not a mere verbal agreement, but a stipulated
element of the standard contract (“CBS News shall instruct its
cameramen and camera crews to make every reasonable effort to avoid

training any television camera on any fights among or injuries to the
players”) that Bell insisted upon. “I never would and never have
questioned the right of a reporter to write about anything he sees in an
NFL game,”he explained.“Reporters are free to say anything they want.
They're doing a job for the public. However, in the matter of television
and radio we are doing a job for the public, a job of showing them the
best football in the world. We don't want kids sitting in the living room
to see their heroes trading punches. That doesn't teach good
sportsmanship.”
The announcer Bob Wolff would recall receiving a late night call from
Bell just hours after a Colts-Redskins game in August 1955. “Just
checking you out,” Bell told the young announcer. “Good call, good
excitement, but a couple of flaws. You called tonight's game an
exhibition game. We don't play exhibition games. We play hard-fought
pre-season games. Get it? Once you said, ‘The runner was tripped
coming through the line.’ Bob, this is a tackling game. These guys don't
go around sticking out their legs to trip people. A final thing. In the last
quarter, you wrestled a fullback to the ground. Bob, that's another sport.
We're football. Otherwise, good job.”
The system was rudimentary, but it worked. In 1949, league television
rights had totaled $75,000. By the late 1950s, it was a multimilliondollar enterprise that, because it was so astutely managed through the
blackout rules, was contributing to annual records in attendance.
“I don't believe there is any honesty in selling a person a ticket and
then, after you've taken his dollars, decide to put the game on television,
where he could've seen it for nothing,” said Bell. “As long as I have
anything to do with this league, home games won't be televised, period.”
The numbers were hard to argue with, as average attendance at NFL
games increased from 23,356 in 1950 to 43,617 by 1959.
Even the national press was starting to take note. At the Associated
Press bureau in New York City, two young writers—Don Weiss and Jim
Kensil— sensed the game's increasing significance, and fought with the
AP Sports chief, Te d Smits, to get more coverage. As the sport's
popularity increased through the mid-’50s, Weiss would often look at the

daily sports story budget from the AP and shake his head at the lack of
football features. The material that did run was hard to come by, since
the NFL's publicity chief, Labrum, was not particularly sophisticated.
“Even if you would call to Philadelphia,” said Weiss, “you never got any
information that amounted to anything. Anything you developed you
developed on your own. Even that didn't get much reception because the
powers that be at the time weren't sure that the readers wanted it.” But
that marginalization began to change after the Giants’ title in 1956, and
by the 1958 season, Weiss and Kensil were heartened by the broader
staffing and priority placed on the sport. “The ’58 season was a catalyst
that opened the AP's eyes to professional football,” said Weiss. “We
staffed that later part of that season to a greater extent than anything we
had ever done before.”
As the 1958 season built to its climax, with the league bound for its
ninth consecutive season of rising attendance, the NFL clearly was as
healthy as it had ever been. The game's franchises, save for the Chicago
Cardinals (in the shadow of Halas's Bears), had stabilized. Television
revenues were good and getting better. The challenge from the AAFC
was long past, and an early ’50s salary war with the Canadian Football
League had been effectively pushed off, with an infusion of cash and the
league's higher profile. Antitrust questions from Congress had been
muted, if not stilled.
“A combination of things is responsible for the mounting interest in
pro football,” Bell said that fall. “First, and foremost, the nation's press,
radio and television annually give us $50 million worth of free publicity
and promotion that General Motors couldn't buy. Secondly, we're giving
the paying public what it wants—entertainment. I say that a pro game is
the best show on Earth. Moreover, the keen competition lends an
element of suspense. There isn't any such animal as a weak sister in our
league anymore. You knock my brains out this Sunday and I knock your
brains out the next time we meet. Do you realize that of the first 54
games played [this season], 32 of them were won by the so called
underdog?”
The commissioner's oft-repeated adage—“On any given Sunday, any
team in our league can beat any other team”—was proving true. But the
league was offering more than mere competition. With the championship

race building in intensity throughout the season, the league was taking
advantage of the episodic nature of its weekly schedule. Crucial games
were being discussed in offices on Mondays, and coming match-ups were
being anticipated throughout the week. And what would occur in the
final weeks of the 1958 campaign would build to the sort of crescendo
that would eloquently announce the sport's arrival at the shoulder of
baseball's popularity.
The three central figures in the serial drama that would conclude the
1958 sea-son—and help send pro football's popularity soaring into the
’60s—had all joined the league within the previous three seasons.
Johnny Unitas had signed with the Colts in the spring of 1956; the same
year saw the rookie campaign of the Giants’ Sam Huff, the hard-nosed
tackle from West Virginia, whom Tom Landry would quickly convert to
the new position of middle linebacker in his 4-3. Joining them in the
headlines a year later, as the best player on the other best-known team
of the era, was the incomparable Jim Brown of the Cleveland Browns.
Going into the 1957 draft, held November 27, 1956, Paul Brown was
suffering through his first losing season as a pro coach, as well as his
first year without Otto Graham. He was desperate for a quarterback, and
possessed the sixth overall selection in the first round.
Green Bay won the bonus choice, and went for Heisman Trophy–
winning quarterback Paul Hornung; the Packers also had their own pick
at number four and took tight end Ron Kramer. Drafting second and
needing a running back, the Rams selected Southern Cal running back
“Jaguar” Jon Arnett, the hometown attraction who was seen as one of
the top two running back prospects along with Syracuse's Jim Brown.
Decades later, many were still regretting the decision. “The scouting
department, and all our graders were for Jim Brown,” said the Rams’
cinematographer, Mickey Dukich, who helped compile and collate
scouting reports close to the draft. “The grade points were for Jim
Brown, but [Rams co-owner] Ed Pauley wanted the local boy.”
The two quarterbacks that most interested Paul Brown were Stanford's
John Brodie, who went third to San Francisco, and Purdue's Len Dawson,
selected fifth by Pittsburgh.
With the two quarterbacks gone, Paul Brown selected Jim Brown, and

in so doing, found more than he could have hoped for. Brown's impact as
a runner was immediate, and powerful. Instantly, he would dominate the
position in pro football. At 6-foot-2, 230 pounds, he was a fast,
intimidating, angry runner who delivered as much punishment as he
sustained. He'd take off from his three-point stance, moving with a
power and purpose, take the ball from the quarterback, and burst
forward with a brutal confidence, running in a coiled position with his
head up. Then, at the point of contact, when other runners would cover
up or try to fall forward, Jim Brown exploded. Tucking the football
tightly to his gut, he'd lower a shoulder toward his tackler, and swing his
free arm into his opponent's chest with a stunning forearm shiver. After
a touchdown run against the Steelers in the Browns’ first exhibition in
1957, Brown came to the sidelines, where Paul Brown sought him out
and said simply, “You're my fullback.”
Huff was already a young star of the vaunted Giants defense when he
had his first meeting with Jim Brown in a 1957 game that would leave
Huff with an indelible memory: “It was early in the third quarter, and
here came Jim Brown through a hole and there I was to meet him. I hit
that big sucker head-on and my headgear snapped down and cut my
nose and my teeth hit together so hard the enamel popped off. He broke
my nose, broke my teeth, and knocked me cold. I woke up in the
training room with an ice pack on my head and my nose bleeding. My
teeth were killing me. I always took great pride in those teeth; in fact,
people always used to tease me about my nice, big smile. Well, it wasn't
so nice anymore. I was lying there and my tongue was going all over
these rough edges and I was screaming, ‘My teeth are gone, my teeth are
gone!’ ”
In Jim Brown, Paul Brown had found the greatest single force he
would ever marshal as a football coach, as well as the most difficult
personality—one at least as strong-willed as his own. The conflict and
tension between the blessing and the challenge would define the rest of
the coach's career in Cleveland.
Brown confounded many of the racial stereotypes of the day. He was
neither surly nor jovial. He was a team player, but one who was fully
aware of his value to the team. And while he embraced many of the
notions of team unity on the field, he was unquestionably his own man

off it, where in his rookie season he purchased a light purple-and-white
Cadillac convertible, which he parked next to the Browns’ practice field
at League Park. He was the sort of man, to borrow the Southern
expression of the period, who took guff from no one.

He would at once bridle against Brown's remedial methods of
discipline and uniformity, while recognizing that those same methods
were color-blind, unlike those of so many other coaches. “Paul's
dictatorship discouraged cliques, and discouraged racial prejudice,”
Brown recalled. “His rules were not to be questioned, by anyone. We all
had to abide by them equally. That was very pleasing to me.”
But Jim Brown had seen the behavior of black sports stars like Jackie
Robinson, Joe Louis, and Jesse Owens, and he'd vowed that he would
not capitulate. “Jackie had to do it,” he said. “Jackie had to play a role
because of the plan that they had, and he made a vow to Branch Rickey,
to play that role. That was not his nature; if he did not have to do it for
the betterment of the whole, he would not have done it. Joe Louis was a
nice man that was kind of like that anyway; Jesse Owens was obviously
that way. My attitude was, in no way was I going to be that way…. In no
way did I ever feel that I would accept discrimination.”
The two strong-willed men would inevitably clash, but in the short
term, the arrival of Jim Brown brought about an instant renaissance for
the Browns. Cleveland went 9-2-1 to win the Eastern Conference title in
Brown's rookie year of 1957, when he led the league in rushing with 942
yards on 202 carries. (Rick Casares, the runner-up, carried two more
times that season, and gained 242 fewer yards.)
Jim Brown was even better in 1958, gaining an NFL record 1,527
yards, averaging 5.9 yards per carry and scoring 17 touchdowns to lead
the league in scoring. By the eighth game of the season, he broke the
existing all-time season yardage and touchdown records (both held by
Steve Van Buren). Cleveland jumped off to a 9-2 record and went into
Yankee Stadium for the regular season finale on December 14 against
the 8-3 Giants, needing a win or a tie to wrap up their second straight
conference title and Paul Brown's eighth in nine NFL seasons.
On the first play from scrimmage, Brown broke for a 65-yard
touchdown run, to give Cleveland a 7–0 lead. But it was his only score of

the day and, in a blizzard, the Giants rallied, eventually tying the game
at 10. Then in the last minutes, Summerall came on to kick the winning
field goal, estimated at the time at 49 yards, though no one really knew,
since the standing snow had obscured the yard lines.

All season long, the Giants—many of them living in the residential
apartments at the stately Hotel Concourse Plaza (“The business and
social center of the Bronx”), just up 161st Street from Yankee Stadium—
had felt like a team of destiny, and the unlikely regular season finale win
against Cleveland only heightened the sensation. In Cleveland, several
players grumbled about Paul Brown's decision before a field goal attempt
at the end of the third quarter that would have given the team a 13–3
lead. Brown called time out, then ran a fake field goal, which was
stuffed. “From that point on, Paul never had quite the same respect from
the players,” said Cleveland Press beat writer Bob August. “The Giants
suddenly became a big issue.”
Though the Browns returned for a rematch the following week, they
were a spent team. Falling behind early, they gave the ball to Brown just
seven times for eight yards. The Giants won the game, and the Eastern
Conference title, 10–0. It was Cleveland's first shutout loss since 1950,
when Owen debuted his umbrella defense.
The match-up was set. Because the site of championship games rotated
on an annual basis, the 1958 title game would be played in New York,
with the Eastern Conference champion Giants playing host to the upstart
Western Conference champion Baltimore Colts. Landry had prepared
them for the game with his usual attention for detail. But while against
the Browns he could work off the rather predictable tendencies of Paul
Brown, Unitas was calling the plays for Baltimore and, as events would
show, he had a mind all his own.
Yankee Stadium was not quite sold out for the game, partly due to
weather concerns, partly due to a newspaper strike that had minimized
coverage surrounding it. But around 15,000 Colts fans journeyed to New
York from Baltimore, and their presence gave the game a tension even in
the stands, where the Baltimore faithful made nearly as much noise as
the Giants fans.

It was, of course, a game for the ages, and Weeb Ewbank made a
pregame speech that was worthy of the moment. In the locker room
beforehand, he singled out fourteen of the Colts’ thirty-five players, each
of whom had been released or traded by another team in the league.
“Pittsburgh didn't want you, but we picked you up off the sandlots,” he
told Unitas. To cornerback Milt Davis, he said,“Detroit didn't want you,
but I'm glad I got you.” Spying guards Art Spinney and Alex Sandusky,
Ewbank said, “You couldn't play offensive end, and you were too small
for defensive end, but we made offensive guards out of you.” Ewbank
even alluded to himself being a castoff, the second choice for the Colts
after Blanton Collier had taken his name out of consideration. The
purpose of the speech was obvious, but it was effective nonetheless.
Many of the Colts were still angry over Charlie Conerly's remarks,
published in his wife's weekly column in a New York tabloid, about how
the Giants “outgutted” Baltimore in their regular season meeting.
The Colts came out and were sluggish in the first quarter, hurting
themselves with two turnovers and a blocked field goal, but when
Gifford fumbled on a pass attempt deep in his own territory, Baltimore
capitalized quickly to go up 7–3 early in the second period. After a long
Giants drive ended in another Gifford fumble, at the Colts’ 14, Unitas
executed a long, masterful drive that at the close of the half ended with
a perfect pass to Berry between two defenders, giving the Colts a 14–3
lead.
The third period was played at a desperate pitch by the Giants. On the
first drive, Sam Huff hit Raymond Berry after he was already out of
bounds, a hit so flagrant that Ewbank responded with a punch to Huff's
jaw. The two men were separated, and neither was ejected—in fact,
there was no penalty on the play. But the Colts’ drive stalled. Later in
the quarter, Baltimore drove down to the Giants’ three, where on firstand-goal, New York's defense stiffened and held for three downs. On
fourth-and-goal at the two, with a chance to put the game away, Ewbank
kept mediocre placekicker Steve Myhra on the sidelines, and let Unitas
make the call. The play was “428,” a little used fullback option calling
for a pitchout wide to Ameche, who would take two steps as if on a
sweep, then pass to Jim Mutscheller in the end zone. The play was
executed perfectly and Mutscheller was wide open. But Ameche hadn't

heard the “4” in Unitas's play call, so he thought he was running the
Colts’ regular “28” pitch play and kept the ball, where he was tackled for
a four-yard loss. It was the first real moment that the Giants’ fans had to
cheer, and three plays later, the offense responded with another one of
those absurd plays they'd been making in crucial situations all season
long. Conerly, in the game since late in the first quarter, hit Rote on a
deep pass down the center of the field. Defensive back Andy Nelson
tackled Rote at the 25, jarring the ball loose, but the Giants’ Alex
Webster, trailing the play, picked the ball up and brought it to the 1. The
Giants, outplayed all day, scored on the next play to trail by just 14–10,
and the momentum had switched sides. After stopping Baltimore on
three plays, lightning struck again, with Conerly hitting end Bob
Schnelker for 17 and then 46 yards, then finding Gifford open on the
sideline, where he brought it in for the go-ahead touchdown.
The incredible din only heightened the sense of urgency, and it was
three more possessions before Unitas led Baltimore out for the gametying drive. One key play, on a second-and-10 situation, found Berry
lined up on the left side, as the primary receiver on a 12-yard square-out
pattern. But one of the silent signals the two players had established
over the years was that if a linebacker came out wide to face up on
Berry, the receiver would change his route to a quick slant pattern. The
secret switch came decades before “sight adjustments” were common in
the NFL, and it worked perfectly as Unitas hit Berry for 25 yards, with
1:04 left. On the next two passes, he found Berry again, first for 15, then
for 22 yards. At that point, the Colts field goal unit came out and Myhra
kicked the game-tying 20-yard field goal.
The exquisite tension of overtime, culminating with Ameche's
touchdown run to give the Colts the 23–17 win, was watched by 45
million Americans on television, including President Eisenhower at his
Gettysburg retreat. To many in the league it felt like the culmination of a
long journey. Bell was in the press box afterward, tears of joy in his eyes,
shaking hands with John Steadman and saying, “I never thought I'd see a
day like today.”
In the Giants’ locker room, the dominant emotion, next to
disappointment, was awe at Unitas's otherworldly composure.
“Everything we expected him to do, and what you absolutely believed he

would do, he didn't do,” said the Giants’ safety Emlen Tunnell. “He did
exactly the opposite. Those of us who have been around knew we had
been beaten by a better man.”
Even the losers, though saddened by the defeat, were exhilarated by
the classic game. Giants owner Tim Mara would die only weeks later
(with his sons Wellington and Jack succeeding him), but every day
throughout early January, he'd show up at the Giants’ office at the usual
seven o'clock and find another dozen or so new season ticket orders.
“He'd say, ‘We're gonna sell out next year,’ ” Wellington Mara said. “He
died on a real high.”
The Colts headed home to Baltimore, and more proof of pro football's
impact. There perhaps has never in American sports been anything quite
like the scene that took place on the tarmac of Friendship Airport in
Baltimore that night. As the crowd, estimated to be at least 30,000 by
local police, pushed out of the terminal and onto the macadam to wait
for the victorious Colts, the planes taxied to a distant hangar in the far
east of the runway, where the players and coaches got into two buses
(an ambulance took the injured Marchetti directly to a hospital). The
first bus drove over to the crowd for a series of scheduled victory
interviews and was engulfed by the mob, prompting the second bus to
peel away from the scene and take an alternate route to Baltimore, since
the highway leading to the airport was clogged with fans.
The police cruiser escorting the bus to the interview platform was
similarly swamped, and as revelers jumped on the roof of the police car,
they demolished it. By the time WBAL-TV announcer Joe Croghan cut
his microphone to seek cover, there were dozens of people on top of the
bus and a huge throng surrounding it, with everyone leaning forward for
a glimpse of their heroes, and those on top of the bus jumping and
stomping in a rhythmic, chanting cacophony. Inside the bus, according
to the Baltimore News-American’s John Steadman, the players “watched
in disbelief at what was going on around them and listened to the
pounding on the roof…. The crowd wouldn't allow itself to be restored
to calm and order. Some fans were knocked down in the melee, women
lost hats and even their shoes as the crowd moved back and forth,
similar to a storm-tide that had grown violent and wicked. In the front of
the bus, Kellett and Ewbank agreed they should not attempt to get off

but should wait out the turbulence. ‘They'll tear us to pieces,’ said
Ewbank. ‘… We can't stand here all night. But I guess this is what they
have been waiting and longing for.’ ”
When the bus was finally extricated from the crowd, there were more
than a dozen people, mostly teenagers, still on the roof. At a roadblock
outside the airport proper, the bus stopped and the police herded
fourteen more off their perch atop the bus. Temporarily taken into
custody, some were pushed into the back of a police car. “I just want to
meet some Colts,” exclaimed one teen and, eventually, Unitas got out of
the bus and went back to greet the boys, who were released without
charges. Much had been written, in October 1957, of how the
Milwaukee Braves’ trip to the World Series had put the Wisconsin city in
the national consciousness, but such a claim had never been made for a
football championship. But in the shining closing weeks of the 1958
season, pro football had achieved a kind of transcendent visibility, the
fruits of which were reaped by the ecstatic city of Baltimore. Assessing
the mob scene at the airport later, Steadman could only resort to
superlatives. “Berserk Baltimore fans, many of them,” he wrote, “had
gone temporarily insane.”
In the 1958 title game, pro football had arrived as a viable alternative
to baseball, not merely as the most popular sport, but the one that best
defined America. And in Unitas's high-tops and laconic manner, the
game—and the country—had discovered a sports metaphor for the Cold
War era. With the two long drives in the 1958 title game, and the
endless dissection of the pressure and strategy surrounding those
marches that circulated through the press afterward, the myth of the
quarterback as “field general” was virtually complete, refashioned in the
image of Unitas's distinctive style.
Sammy Baugh and Sid Luckman were seen as great athletes and
leaders, but little was written about their roles in the mind games of
football. Otto Graham, the most successful quarterback of the ’40s and
early ’50s, was famous for not calling the plays in Paul Brown's system.
Then came Unitas— stoic and fearless and unflappable, with a sixth
sense for reading defenses and correctly guessing what opponents might
do in a certain situation.
Unitas's style hadn't changed in three years. But instead of being

perceived as goofy, he was suddenly the standard for what quarterbacks
ought to look like. Millions of boys around the country started
scrunching up their shoulders to simulate Unitas's pinched profile in
shoulder pads, and throwing with the elongated, fingers-down followthrough that they'd seen Johnny U display on television.

By the time the Colts won their second straight title, after the 1959
season, Unitas had become an authentic American archetype, the virtual
definition of a certain kind of honorable American manhood, as much of
a keystone figure as Bogart's hard-boiled characters or Sinatra's hardluck crooner. Except, of course, there was no script and no reshoots, and
when Unitas got up from a blow that broke his nose and gashed his
mouth, as happened against the Bears in 1960, he refused to come off
the field, and threw a game-winning touchdown on the next play. The
quality fans were seeing was similar to what Hemingway called grace
under pressure and what test pilots referred to as “the right stuff.”
By the end of the ’50s, a growing number of Americans, especially
those in NFL cities, were becoming transfixed with the game. The New
York Giants’ publicist Don Smith observed that the temper of football
crowds by the end of the decade was “violently partisan and devoutly
involved. They did not wander about in search of hot-dog vendors
during the play, nor go visiting among friends in other sections, as
baseball fans would do. They yearned openly to participate in the
struggle and would invariably jump to their feet whenever a particularly
long run or forward pass seemed about to erupt.” In Smith's view, what
had kept fans away from pro football in the past was less apathy than
“sheer ignorance, too often fostered by certain sportswriters, who did
not believe the professional game could be as thrilling as the college
version. When television began to allow fans to see for themselves, they
recognized that they had been missing a great spectacle, and one in
which it was easy to involve one's self, heart, soul, voice and paycheck.”
Over the coming years, few would become as involved as a mildmannered fan from Dallas, Texas, who on December 28, 1958, was just
another television spectator, one of the tens of millions of Americans
watching the Colts and the Giants into the late afternoon. While others

put off dinner or long rides home, he had delayed his trip to the sports
arena in Houston, where he'd traveled to watch the Southwest
Conference Holiday Basketball Tournament. The diffident young Texan,
heir to a billionaire oilman, had spent much of the previous few months
casting about for a major league baseball team or professional football
team to buy, never really quite sure of his direction.
By the end of that afternoon, though, Lamar Hunt was sure. After
seeing Alan Ameche plunge over for the game-winner in overtime, he sat
on the hotel bed and realized that his mind had been made up. “My
interest emotionally was always more in football,” Hunt said. “But
clearly the ’58 Colts-Giants game, sort of in my mind, made me say,
‘Well, that's it. This sport really has everything. And it televises well.’
And who knew what that meant?”

7

“A Light Bulb Came On”
The best ideas are common property.
Seneca

W

hile the appeal of pro football grew in the ’50s, the universe of
pro football did not. There remained only 432 jobs in the
country for professional football players, just thirty-six spots on each of
the NFL's twelve teams. There was little turnover from one year to the
next, competition for spots was fierce and often arbitrary, and coaches
possessed all the power.
“The NFL in the ’50s was this brutal, Darwinian, biological, survivalof-the-fittest environment,” said Jack Kemp, the strong-armed backup
quarterback from Occidental College drafted by the Detroit Lions in
1957. For unheralded players like Kemp, who showed talent and the
potential to play at the NFL level, there was always the elusive question
of opportunity. Lions coach Buddy Parker thought enough of Kemp to
trade for him after he left Detroit for Pittsburgh in 1957. But in the 1958
preseason, when the Steelers traveled to Los Angeles to play in front of a
crowd that included dozens of his friends and family, Kemp boomed a
punt deep instead of following Parker's orders to kick it out of bounds.
After the kick was returned for a touchdown, Kemp sheepishly returned
to the sidelines, where a seething Parker released him on the
spot.“Kemp, you're going to be a great punter in this league someday,”

said Parker. “But not for the Pittsburgh Steelers. You're cut.”
Shortly thereafter, Kemp landed on the taxi squad of the 1958 New
York Giants, and was hoping to stick with the Giants the following
season. But when they drafted All-American quarterback Lee Grosscup in
the 1959 draft, he wasn't invited to camp. After a short stint in the
Canadian Football League in 1959, he signed with the San Francisco
49ers, and was suited up for his first game in San Francisco when he was
ruled ineligible—after a protest was filed by Paul Brown—because he'd
already played in the CFL that year. In three seasons of professional
football, Kemp threw 18 passes in the NFL.
It was a closed shop for owners as well. As the league's attendance,
revenues, and profile grew through the 1950s, dozens of businessmen
called on Bert Bell to inquire about a new franchise in the NFL. The one
with seniority was the crusty Minneapolis insurance executive Ole
Haugsrud, who'd owned the Duluth Eskimos in the 1920s, and still held
an “option contract” to have the first chance at a franchise if the league
ever decided to put a club back into Minnesota. Minneapolis was
growing in the 1950s, but the group to which Haugsrud belonged,
Minnesota Sports, Inc., received little encouragement from Bell, who told
Haugsrud in April 1959 that he saw no chance for the league's expansion
into the city.
The Minneapolis group was hardly alone. In the ’50s, representatives
from Seattle, Buffalo, New Orleans, Denver, and Miami all heard nearly
the same thing. The NFL wouldn't completely rule out expansion (to do
so would invite scrutiny from the government's antitrust division), but as
Bell wrote to Denver Bears general manager Bob Howsam in May 1958,
“I do not believe there will be any expansion in the National Football
League until at least 1961, if there is any even at that time.”
This stasis came at a time when the pace of commerce and culture was
quickening in remarkable ways. Advertising itself was reaching new
heights. American companies had spent $5.7 billion on advertising their
products in 1950, but would spend $11.9 billion a decade later.
Consumer spending also was way up; the eight suburban shopping
centers in the U.S. in 1946 had grown to more than 4,000 by the end of
the ’50s. Interest in football was clearly up as well, as attendance had
increased to record highs during every year of the decade.

The league did consent to form a committee to study the issue of
expansion in 1958, but the committee of the whole never met, and soon
was pared down to Art Rooney and George Halas. The true prospects for
expansion were bleak. A unanimous vote was required to approve any
new team. Washington's George Preston Marshall was a staunch
opponent on general principle, and the Chicago Cardinals were opposed
out of self-interest. The lowly Cardinals, who lost 100 games and nearly
$1 million over the decade, were considering a move and wanted to
keep all options open. The downtrodden club, once owned by the late
Charles Bidwill, by now belonged to his widow, Violet, and her new
husband, St. Louis businessman Walter Wolfner. For the Cardinals,
located on the South Side of Chicago, in the shadow of George Halas and
the Bears, second best was a way of life.
Since telecasts of NFL games were blacked out when a team was at
home, and since the Cardinals or Bears were at home nearly every week,
the lucrative Chicago TV market was nearly bereft of pro football on
television. Bell had been hoping for years that the Wolfners would sell
their franchise or move elsewhere, to give their club a chance to
succeed.
In the absence of any movement from the expansion committee, and
with the continued presence of two teams in the Chicago market,
expansion seemed dead in the water. And so when Lamar Hunt called
Bert Bell's office in the spring of 1958 to inquire about an expansion
franchise in the NFL, Bell told him pretty much the same thing he'd told
people in Seattle, Orange County, Houston, Atlanta, New Orleans, and
Minneapolis for years: “Call the Wolfners.”
At age twenty-six in the spring of 1958, Lamar Hunt was as polite and
mild-mannered as he was rich, which is to say absurdly so. A shade
under six feet, with a smallish head, chestnut brown hair carefully
parted and combed, and jet-black horn-rimmed glasses, he looked and
acted like a healthful, earnest accountant. He was genial but so
unassuming as to seem almost meek. In short, he was an inversion of
every stereotype that ever existed about Texas oil tycoons and their
offspring.

Born in 1932, Lamar was the son of the self-made oil billionaire
Haroldson Lafayette Hunt, whom Fortune magazine described in 1948 as
the world's wealthiest man. H. L. Hunt was a larger-than-life figure
whose gambling and courtship of women were conducted along the
same general dimensions as his architectural instincts. From the age of
six, Lamar Hunt grew up in the sparsely settled development of White
Rock Lake, just outside Dallas, in a house modeled after George
Washington's Mount Vernon, though, typical of the scale of his father's
ambition, twice the size.
Perhaps in a response to his father's tumultuous private and public
life, Lamar Hunt made a conscious effort, from an early age, to blend in,
to be polite, to be one of the crowd. When alone, he would invent his
own games, intricate solitaire pastimes with clear rules and precise
record keeping.
He was a decent athlete, though never physically imposing, and after
attending high school at the Hill School in Pottstown, Pennsylvania, he
returned to Dallas and Southern Methodist University. His college
football career was not distinguished; he was a third-string end, behind
Raymond Berry, and saw only twenty minutes of action over his three
years on the varsity, not enough to earn a letter.
Forrest Gregg, an All–Southwest Conference lineman at SMU a year
behind Hunt, faced off against him daily in practice. But for more than a
year, until another teammate told Gregg about visiting Hunt's parents’
home and swimming in the Hunts’ backyard swimming pool, Gregg had
no idea that his teammate came from wealth. “That's how smart I was
and how unassuming Lamar was,” said Gregg. “You'd never know. He
wore the same thing I did, which was penny loafers, and socks we stole
from the athletic department, SMU T-shirts, and blue jeans. That was
him and he was one of the guys. I always appreciated that about Lamar.”
On less affable men, this parsimony could seem either soulless or meanspirited. But most of Hunt's friends viewed it as an eccentric if unshowy
thriftiness.
After graduating with a geology degree from SMU in 1956, Hunt
joined Hunt Oil Co., and quickly realized that he possessed neither the
temperament nor interest to follow his father and brothers in a life
devoted to the oil business. Instead, he was animated by what he would

later describe as “a passion for show business or entertainment or the
sports business—they're all interchangeable in my mind.” With the trust
fund from his father and a gently reckoned optimism, Lamar Hunt set
out to make his own mark, proceeding all the while with a quiet air of
absolute discretion, consistent with the circumspect nature of a young
man who was “horrified” the first time he saw his name in the paper.
Over the next two years, he traveled extensively, following his curiosity
about sports, learning the specifics about financing football and baseball
teams.
Late in 1958, Hunt began hearing rumors of a third major league in
baseball, and he joined as a minority investor a group trying to secure a
franchise for the Dallas–Fort Worth area. Branch Rickey had described a
new baseball league as “inevitable” in May 1958, and began informally
fronting the organization some months later. Hunt traveled with the
group to New York to hear Rickey speak late in 1958, and remembered
Rickey being a “very convincing person, a very reasonable person—he
wasn't a flamboyant salesman or anything like that.”
But football had always been Lamar Hunt's first love, and by the
beginning of 1959 he'd grown determined to find a pro football team.
He'd been negotiating with the Wolfners for months, with no more
success than any of the Cardinals’ other frustrated suitors. In February
1959, Hunt traveled one final time to discuss a deal, this time in Miami,
where the Wolfners spent their winters. Hunt had offered a variety of
different scenarios in which he could move the team down to Dallas and
eventually retain a controlling interest. But by the time of his last visit,
Walter Wolfner seemed newly intent on staying in Chicago, and was
driving a hard bargain.
“Do you know Bud Adams?” Wolfner asked at one point. Hunt said he
didn't, and Wolfner explained that Adams, an oil millionaire from
Houston, had also been interested in acquiring the team. Others had
approached him as well, he boasted, mentioning the potential ownership
group in Minneapolis and Denver. But he wasn't budging. The team
would stay in Chicago, he vowed, and would be controlled by the
Wolfners.
Hunt shook Wolfner's hand, and wished him the best of luck. Then he

took a cab to the Miami airport and boarded an American Airlines flight
to Dallas. The four-engine propeller plane took more than four hours to
get from Miami to Dallas, and en route on that winter evening, Hunt
glumly considered the fact that he was no closer to owning a football
franchise than he'd been a year earlier, when he'd first placed a call to
Bert Bell.
Sitting on the plane, Hunt began to synthesize the disparate bits of
information that he'd received over the previous months: Bud Adams in
Houston. A group in Denver, likely led by Bob Howsam. An ownership
group in Minnesota. Every one of these people wanted the Cardinals to
move to their city. But the Cardinals wouldn't sell, and the NFL wouldn't
expand anytime soon.
And then, it was as if, Hunt would say later, “a light bulb came on.”

Why not go see THOSE people and put together a new football league?

Hunt had long had a habit of taking copious notes on whatever paper
was available, and many of his brainstorms had been sketched out on
the back of envelopes or in the margins of magazines. But with this bolt
of inspiration, he knew he needed more. He asked a stewardess for some
stationery, and hurriedly sketched out the plans on three sheets of
onionskin writing paper with an American Airlines letterhead. Under the
heading “ORIGINAL 6; FIRST YEAR'S OPERATIONS,” he began outlining
the particulars of a prospective new league. He had looked at the
Cardinals’ financial statements (the club had lost nearly $220,000 during
the 1956 and 1957 seasons alone), and so knew enough about the
economics of football to come up with a prospective profit-and-loss
statement for a hypothetical pro team.
Writing in short, neat printing strokes, Hunt finished his outline,
drawing up provisions for owners, even making rough estimates on the
costs of equipment and the revenue from ticket sales. By the time the
plane arrived in Dallas, Hunt's idea seemed fully formed. He drew up a
rough schedule for the first season, going so far as to sketch out the
likely weekends the regular season would begin and end.
And then, typical of his operating style, Lamar Hunt told no one.
In the coming weeks, though, he started to look at the entire sports

universe with fresh eyes. From his office, he began accumulating
background information on the prospects of virtually every large city in
the United States. Within weeks, he became convinced that his idea was
perfectly timed. If Major League Baseball, with sixteen franchises and
slumping attendance, was in need of expansion—as Rickey persuasively
argued—then there was an even greater necessity for expansion in pro
football, with but twelve franchises and rising attendance in each year of
the ’50s.
Still moving cautiously, Hunt called Bell in March 1959, to inquire again
about the possibility of an expansion team in the NFL. Bell reiterated
that the league couldn't consider expansion until resolving the Cardinals
situation. He added that the league was not at all impressed with Dallas,
because of the poor performance of the Texans in 1952, and that its first
commitment was to the city of Buffalo. After Hunt pressed further for an
appointment with the expansion committee, Bell suggested he call
George Halas, then vacationing at the Arizona Biltmore in Phoenix. But
Halas was no more accommodating. When Hunt suggested he come visit
Halas to “throw my hat in the ring,” Halas dissuaded him, and called it a
waste of time, adding that “expansion is probably a long way off.”
With that clear indication that the NFL was staying put, Hunt began to
seek out potential owners for a new league. His first prospect was
Kenneth S. “Bud” Adams, also the son of a Texas oilman and much more
in keeping with the traditional stereotype of Texas millionaires. Adams
progressed from a burly youth who played football at Kansas to a
heavyset adult best known for his distinct flair in office decoration. In
his subterranean office in downtown Houston, next to the tasteful
displays of Native American art, Adams had a cage full of rare doves, a
lily pond, and an indoor barbecue pit. He had been known as “Jabber” at
his college prep school, and his Texas patois was both cocksure and
elusive, wholly unintelligible to some from the North. One of Adams's
peers would later say, “To be honest it took me about two or three years
to understand a single word of whatever the hell it was Bud was saying.
He always seemed to be talking out the side of his mouth, not so much
figuratively as literally.”

The two men had never met, but Hunt called Adams and asked if he
could join him for dinner, during which Hunt characteristically spoke
about everything except football. Finally, as Adams was driving him
back to Houston's Hobby Airport to catch a flight to Dallas, Hunt
mentioned that he was interested in starting a new football league. “If I
could come up with some other franchises, would you come in?”

“Hell, yes,” said Adams.
Hunt told him he'd be in touch. Over the following weeks, he was
greeted with equally enthusiastic responses in Denver and Minneapolis.
“We folks here in Minnesota have been trying to get a franchise for some
time,” wrote Ole Haugsrud later, “but it seems as though the National
League does not care to move or expand.”
Feeling he needed a franchise in Los Angeles and New York, Hunt
began casting about for prospects in those cities. Through friend and
former tennis star Gene Mako, he was introduced to Barron Hilton, son
of hotel magnate Conrad Hilton; in New York, Continental League
backer Bill Shea suggested that Hunt contact the popular football
announcer Harry Wismer, instantly the best-known (and, as it would
turn out, least stable) member of the prospective ownership group.
At this point, another man might have called a press conference and
announced the new league. But Lamar Hunt was not one for splashy
shows of Texas bravado. His next step would be characteristic of the
reticence that would later be seen, by his detractors, as a sign of
deviousness, and by his friends as proof of his modest demeanor and
methodical business style. His friend David Dixon, a New Orleans
businessman who'd been working to bring pro football to that city, said
of Hunt, “Lamar is the best super-rich guy I've ever known. But by his
family practices, he's very secretive, a lot of times unnecessarily so.”
Hunt himself would later admit, “I possibly have an indirect way of
finding things out.”
This was certainly the case with his next actions. On June 2, 1959,
Hunt flew to Philadelphia for a lunch with Bert Bell, and they went to
one of Bell's favorite restaurants, the Tavern in Narberth, along with Bert
Bell, Jr., and the Eagles’ Joe “Jiggs” Donoghue. After plenty of the usual
Hunt small talk, with no mention of his own plans for a new league,

Hunt finally mentioned that he was still interested in bringing an
expansion franchise to Dallas. Bell reiterated that the NFL wouldn't
consider expansion until the league solved its “Chicago problem” and
achieved a greater measure of competitive balance. “My dad told him
they weren't ready for expansion,” said Bert Bell, Jr. “He wanted the
bottom teams to win three or four games, some amount of games, before
they were ready for expansion.”
After the meal, Bell called Hunt over to the corner of the restaurant
and said, less vexed than perplexed, “What in the world did you come up
here for? What in the world do you want?” Hunt repeated his interest in
expansion and Bell reiterated, “The owners are not interested in any
kind of expansion, they have no expansion plans, and it's just a lost
cause as far as Dallas is concerned.” Then Bell added, “As far as I am
concerned, I don't believe they will ever vote to expand.”
Satisfied he'd exhausted all avenues with the NFL, Hunt returned to
Dallas and began firming up his plans for the new league. The next
month, before making any announcement, he sent an emissary—the
former TCU great Davey O'Brien, one of Bell's favorites during his early
years coaching the Eagles—to approach Bell, on behalf of the
prospective new league. “I was at least intelligent enough to know that I
did not want to start a war,” said Hunt. O'Brien called on Bell and
explained that a new league was being formed and sought his blessings,
without revealing any of the investors or potential cities, but adding that
the group hoped Bell might even consider serving as commissioner of the
new league. Bell declined, but wished them luck and, before O'Brien left,
added, “Incidentally, tell that young friend of yours in Dallas that he can
come to me for advice any time.”
But it was Bell himself who made the next call. On July 26, the
commissioner phoned O'Brien and explained that he was due to testify
before Congress, part of the NFL's long and as yet fruitless efforts to gain
legislation that would provide the sport with the same antitrust
protection as baseball. The Subcommittee on Anti-Trust Monopoly, part
of the Judiciary Committee in the U.S. Senate, was sure to ask him about
expansion, Bell explained. He wanted O'Brien to ask if it might be okay
to mention the proposed new league. And so on July 28, while Bell
entertained a subcommittee with his folksy dissertation on the state of

pro football, Lamar Hunt sat silently in the back of Room 318 of the
Senate Office Building, listening while his idea for a new football league
was announced to the world. He couldn't have asked for a better
salesman than Bert Bell.

“The more football there is and the more advertisement of pro
football, the better off we are,” Bell told the committee. “We are in favor
of the new league.” He added that he considered the years of the NFL's
rancorous war with the AAFC were “a great thing for pro football. Every
newspaper was arguing who was the best and they would keep it in the
papers.” Michigan Sena tor Philip Hart interrupted Bell to point out that
many of the owners didn't consider the AAFC's challenge a great thing
for the sport at the time. “I know,” Bell replied. “But I can't help what
the owners think. I know what it did. I will tell you this is great and I
have talked it over with every owner and not one of them has an
objection to it, not one of them.”
Bert Bell may not have been the most sophisticated man alive, but he
knew how to tell a group of politicians what they wanted to hear. In
fact, he hadn't spoken to any of the other NFL owners about the new
league before speaking to Congress, but he did call George Halas the day
after the speech, telling him that he thought the league was nebulous
and might never get off the ground. That same evening, Hunt and
O'Brien visited Bell at his summer home in Margate, New Jersey,
arriving after ten o'clock and sitting for a freewheeling discussion until
almost two in the morning. Bell was jovial and helpful, repeated that he
was too busy with other things to entertain the thought of running a new
league, but peppered Hunt with helpful advice. He particularly urged the
new league to go with eight teams in the first season, rather than six, on
the grounds that eight was necessary for scheduling purposes, and it also
allowed a league to plausibly split into two divisions, bringing about a
useful rationale for a championship game at the end of the season.
“All of you will enjoy this,” Bell told Hunt at one point,“and all of the
owners will get to become good friends down through the years.
However, there is one thing that will separate you: when you start to
fight over players.” Hunt thanked him for the advice and promised to
stay in touch. Three days later, on August 3, the day after his twentyseventh birthday, Lamar Hunt joined Bud Adams in Adams's Houston

office to announce the start of the American Football League.
“I really liked Bert Bell,” Hunt said. “I really thought we could all get
along.” Hunt would later characterize this opinion as “one of the more
naive thoughts in the history of American sports.”
The first meeting of the new league—which voted to call itself the
American Football League—was held August 14, 1959, in the Imperial
South Suite on the twentieth floor of the Chicago Hilton. They were
sportsmen in the classic sense of being wealthy fanatics, and adjourned
early so all in attendance could make it to Soldier Field to watch the
College All-Star Game. Within days, the league lined up another
franchise owner, Ralph Wilson, a Detroit insurance executive and
minority owner of the Lions, who wanted to place a franchise in Miami,
but ultimately settled on Buffalo, because of stadium availability. (The
issue of stadiums became something of a theme. In Minneapolis,
Houston, Miami, and Seattle, the university stadium that the league
wanted to play in was unavailable. The conflict ultimately caused the
Seattle group, which Bell had personally recommended to Hunt, to drop
out.)
On a Saturday afternoon, August 29, Hunt realized it was not going to
be as easy as he'd hoped. He was at his home in Dallas, trimming shrubs
in and around his rose garden when the phone rang. It was an
Associated Press reporter who asked him for his response to the news
out of Houston: at a press conference before the Steelers-Bears preseason
game, George Halas and Art Rooney had announced that the NFL would
be expanding, with plans to award franchises the following January, to
begin competition in 1961. When asked to name the two most likely
cities for their expansion, they cited Houston and Dallas, where the man
in line for the Dallas NFL franchise was the diminutive, sharp-tongued
Clint Murchison, Jr., like Hunt a son of an oil millionaire.
When he heard the news that Saturday, Hunt remained outwardly
calm, and asked for a few moments to compose a response. He called
back the reporter in a matter of minutes, after writing out a press release
while sitting on his bed. As he read the statement his voice was even and
forceful. “Everybody has been knocking on their door for years and

they've turned everybody down. It is obvious what they are trying to do,
and it can get them into trouble…. They're trying to knock out Dallas
and Houston, but this doesn't change our plans at all and we're moving
ahead. We'll be adding our seventh and eighth teams this fall.”

When Hunt called Bell the following Monday, the commissioner
protested that the matter was largely out of his hands. “What can I do?”
he said. “They want to expand. How can I stop them?” Bell remained
reassuring both privately (he sent Adams a copy of the NFL by-laws, to
help the AFL construct its constitution) and in public. “There are plenty
of players,” he said to a reporter in September.“There are 250 kids
graduating from college every year with pro football ability. We keep
about five per team, a total of 60. That leaves 190 unemployed in
football.”
But with the prospect of the NFL coming into the AFL's two anchor
cities, many more observers thought that Hunt's quest had gone from
daring to foolhardy. To some, continuing with the new league seemed
pointless if the NFL were coming to those cities anyway.
“If Adams and Lamar Hunt insist on war, then they themselves and the
cities they represent will be the losers,” wrote the Houston Post’s Jack
Gallagher the week after the Halas and Rooney announcement. “From
here it would appear that the wisest move the AFL can make at this time
is to disband.”
The 1959 season, which would see Unitas and the Colts march to
another championship, kicked off with Bert Bell in his element, ruling
pro football with his unique air of backslapping rectitude, ever vigilant
to the good of the game.
After fourteen years on the job, and at the age of sixty-six, Bell was
ready to slow down. He'd already envisioned the third act of his football
career: he would retire at the end of the 1959 season and buy the Eagles,
so he could return to the ownership ranks, ending his career in the NFL
as he began it, side by side with Rooney and Mara and Halas. Secretly,
Bell had struck an agreement to buy the Eagles through his negotiations
with his friend Joe Donoghue, part of the One Hundred City Brothers
consortium that had purchased the Eagles from Alexis Thompson in
1949. Bell had secured financing for a $900,000 loan through the

Philadelphia National Bank, and was set to sign the loan on Wednesday,
October 14. It would be a gift to himself for all his hard work, and to his
sons, Bert Jr. and Upton, who would be able to carry on the family
involvement with football.

Bell's plan was still a well-kept secret on the morning of Sunday,
October 11, 1959, when he woke up, read the newspapers, ate breakfast
with Frances, then attended morning mass at St. Margaret's Church.
From there, he and Bert Jr. drove to Franklin Field. Outside the gates,
father and son split up so the commissioner could use the ticket office
telephone, to check once more on any late line movements, then go
down to the field to greet the game officials.
The columnist Jimmy Breslin saw Bell that morning outside the
stadium and witnessed the commissioner being approached by a former
player. “A guy who needed a haircut and had on a suit that has little fray
marks on the cuffs came up the walk and Bert went over to meet him.
He said hello to the guy and gave him a ticket to the game. And, with
that clenched-fist way of staking you all class guys have, he slipped
something in the fellow's hand. ‘Get me on the phone Monday,’ Bert said
to the guy. ‘We'll get something done.’ ”
Bell didn't often spend his games in the press box or with owners.
Instead, he preferred to sit in the stands with season ticket holders. He
changed seats once during the game, moving in the second half to get
into the shade on the warm fall Sunday. Chatting casually with old
friends during breaks, he raptly watched the tense finish of the game
between two teams he'd once owned, on the very field where he'd been a
college quarterback at Penn. And there, with about two minutes left in
the game, Bert Bell collapsed from a massive heart attack.
One writer said, “It was like Caruso dying in the third act of Pagliacci.”
Red Smith wrote, “It was almost as though he were allowed to choose
time and place.”
But it soon became clear that this was far from being the case. Two
days after his father's death, Bert Bell, Jr., received a call from
Philadelphia National Bank informing him that “the Eagles deal was off.”
He knew of no such deal, but found out subsequently about his father's
plans.

While Bell's death was a tragedy for the family, it also came at a
crucial, precarious moment for the league. When the owners met after
the Bell funeral in Philadelphia, it was clear that treasurer and acting
commissioner Austin Gunsel, well liked around the league, might be the
early-line favorite to replace Bell. But a new commissioner wouldn't be
elected until the annual meetings the following January, and until then,
there was only a breach. In Dallas, an alarmed Lamar Hunt quickly
realized that, with Bell gone, all bets were off.
The furtive, unofficial offers began not long after Hunt's league was
formally launched. Even as the NFL was outflanking the AFL,
announcing plans to place teams in its two flagship cities, it was
constantly sending emissaries to negotiate a truce that would have
instantly brought Hunt and Adams what they'd wanted in the first place
—franchises in the NFL.
In September, Hunt and Barron Hilton met with Ed Pauley, Jr., at the
Beverly Hilton. “Mr. Pauley's pitch seemed to be centered around telling
us how sure the American Football League was to fail,” said Hunt, “and
how I would end up supporting all the teams, and that he and his dad
felt it could be worked out so that Bud Adams and I could get a
franchise. In fact, they were convinced then that I was supporting all the
teams…. But he was primarily pointing out that Bud Adams and I could
get a franchise in Dallas and Houston and they would take Barron into
the Rams ownership and the American Football League would fold up its
tent.” Hunt, having committed to the other owners, wouldn't forsake
them.
He'd have numerous chances to reconsider that stance. In the
aftermath of Bell's death, Halas took a more aggressive role in trying to
broker a deal that might bring Hunt and Adams into the NFL, and in so
doing kill any chance for a competing new league. The talks were
revived in late October, when the NFL's own expansion plans in Houston
were hurt by Rice University's announcement that it wouldn't allow its
stadium to be used by any pro teams. Though Hunt listened to and
discussed offers, he never wavered.
The AFL had recently lined up its eighth franchise—Boston, with an

ownership group led by Billy Sullivan, a former Notre Dame football
publicity director —when it gathered in Minneapolis the weekend of
November 21–22 for the first AFL draft. On the eve of the draft, as the
owners sat in a banquet room at the Cedric Adams Hotel waiting to
begin their regularly scheduled evening meeting, Harry Wismer burst
through the door, visibly agitated, carrying a newspaper under his arm.
Someone asked Wismer if he was ready for dinner.
“Yes!” he shouted, slamming the paper on the conference table.“And
this is the last supper!” Pointing to Max Winter of the Minneapolis
group, he added, “And he's Judas!”
The headline of the next day's edition of the Minneapolis Star-Tribune
read “MINNESOTA TO GET NFL FRANCHISE” and detailed the backchannel negotiations by Halas on behalf of convincing the Minneapolis
group to bolt the AFL in favor of the NFL. While the Minneapolis group
had not been the very first to join the new league, they were considered
a crucial franchise in the upper Midwest, and had played a vital role in
the league's early formation. Their abdication to the NFL, expertly
engineered behind the scenes by Halas, was a major blow to the AFL,
and a victory for the older league, which seemed likely to approve
expansion to Dallas and Minneapolis-St. Paul at its annual meetings in
January.
Conducted amid the hangover of the Minneapolis defection, the AFL's
first draft, held November 23, proceeded with an air of anxious
uncertainty. The teams began with “territorial” selections—Houston took
LSU's Billy Cannon, Dallas selected SMU quarterback Don Meredith,
Notre Dame fan Wismer chose to take Irish quarterback George Izo. The
thirty-three-round draft that followed was not so much a draft as a
lottery. Since some teams hadn't even begun to hire personnel
departments yet, it was decided that a committee of personnel men
would get together and pick a master list of players, which then would
be drawn by lot.
It would be two more months before the league would find an eighth
franchise to replace Minneapolis, and the choice of Oakland was one of
necessity, since Los Angeles owner Barron Hilton was threatening to
drop out if he didn't have a natural geographic rival on the West Coast.
The Oakland ownership group was led by Chet Soda, an ebullient

Oakland businessman fond of calling everyone he met “Señor.” At the
press conference announcing the new team, Soda showed up with a
beatific smile and distributed sombreros to many in the press corps,
before announcing that the winner of the name-the-team contest was
“the Oakland Señors.” This prompted perhaps the most animated public
display shown toward the team all year, as the nickname was roundly
panned. Within a few weeks, the club relented, opting for the nickname
Raiders instead.
But the franchise, and seven others, persevered. And when the
American Football League's first season kicked off, with the Boston
Patriots facing the Denver Broncos on September 19, 1960, in front of
21,597 at Boston University Field, it marked a new era for pro football,
one that also ushered in the Dallas Texans, Houston Oilers, Los Angeles
Chargers, New York Titans, Buffalo Bills, and Oakland Raiders. That the
American Football League had survived, bloodied but unbowed, long
enough to see its first season was a credit in large part to Hunt's
ingenuity and steady hand, the loyalty he commanded from owners like
Adams and Hilton, and the indefatigable public relations work of the
league's first commissioner, World War II flying ace Joe Foss. As the face
of the league, Foss made hundreds of speeches in his first year in office,
logging 200,000 air miles—most of which he piloted himself—pushing
the AFL message to Rotary and Kiwanis clubs that gladly listened to the
spiel so that they could meet a genuine war hero. Foss had no experience
in football administration; when he was hired in 1959, he'd seen just two
pro football games in person and a few dozen on television. But his
frontier enthusiasm and plainspoken frankness was a winning
combination. Of the NFL's moves to usurp Dallas and Minnesota, Foss
said, “They certainly haven't been wasting any sweetness on us.”
The lingering animosity that both sides felt would not quickly be
forgotten. Hunt was loath to criticize, but felt he'd been blindsided by
the older league, and at the very least outfoxed by Halas. And the
representatives of the NFL found Hunt too earnest by half, a schemer
whose tactics—coming to meetings with his lawyer, calling a meeting
with Bell after he'd already decided to start the AFL—were designed
with a lawsuit always in the back of his mind. In their view, Hunt had

never really wanted to start his own league, but simply use the threat as
a negotiating ploy.
But this was unfair. The very men who cursed Hunt for the headaches
he caused the NFL would have been thankful for his behavior had they
been with the other AFL owners, on the outside looking in. Hunt's
loyalty and ethics were proven numerous times, as he repeatedly turned
down the opportunity for NFL franchises because some of his partners
would have been frozen out. But his methods were open to question, and
this secretiveness caused more trouble than it prevented. Hunt's
reticence, his workmanlike methodology all would hurt his relationship
with the NFL's owners, who couldn't help but wonder about his real
objectives. And yet, a central fact remained: prior to the formation of the
AFL, there were no specific discussions about expansion in the NFL.
Within weeks after the formation of the league, George Halas and Art
Rooney were announcing plans to expand in two cities by 1961 and two
more by 1962.
Of course, Hunt's persistence and Foss's enthusiasm, alone, wouldn't
have kept the AFL solvent for long. Five different leagues had attempted
to challenge the NFL over the previous forty years, and there were three
other startups in the works in 1959. But the American Football League
that began play in 1960 had an advantage that none of the others were
afforded. The ultimate saving grace was the new league's TV deal,
negotiated in the spring of 1960. It wasn't just the fact of the TV
contract, but the kind of contract that the league negotiated that would
make all the difference. And that was a story in itself.
The genesis of the idea that would transform the landscape of
American professional sports was first publicly proposed—and roundly
dismissed—at the annual meeting of organized baseball, held in
Scottsdale, Arizona, in 1952.
The unwelcome messenger bringing tidings of the future was
baseball's reigning iconoclast, Bill Veeck, the owner of the St. Louis
Browns. Standing before a collection of major and minor league
executives, Veeck rocked the gathering with a portentous warning about
the future of baseball and television, and a radical proposal about how
to confront it.

“It is my contention that the Browns provide half the cast in every
game they play,” said Veeck. “Therefore, we're entitled to our cut of the
TV fees the home club receives for televising our games. Morally, I know
I am right, and I plan to fight this thing to the end.”

The principle that Veeck pointed to was a simple one. Since every
major league game involved two competing clubs, and since the selling
of television rights required no investment on the part of the home club,
he reasoned it was only fair that those rights fees be split equally in each
market between the home and visiting clubs. He proposed that teams
retain only 50 percent of their TV revenue, with the other 50 percent
going into a general pool to be divided equally among all the league's
teams. The response to this idea ranged from “barely polite” applause, in
the words of one attendee, to heated outrage. Afterward, Dodgers owner
Walter O'Malley labeled Veeck “a damned Communist” for his
suggestions.
Veeck was affably defiant in the face of the criticism. “Under this
system they want to continue the rich clubs get richer and the poor clubs
continue poor. With all that television money they're getting the Yanks
can continue to keep outbidding us for talent. They've signed $500,000
worth of bonus players in the last couple of years, paying for ’em out of
the TV money we help provide. We poorer clubs are helping cut our own
throats. None of us is ever going to catch up with the Yankees at that
rate.”
Veeck's measures were defeated in Arizona, but he found a more
sympathetic audience in Philadelphia, where Bert Bell read about the
meeting and telephoned Veeck to hear more details. The NFL's evolving
policy on television was already more clearly defined than baseball's,
with Judge Grim's 1953 decision having ratified the home blackout
policy. Baseball had no set policy, and nowhere near the sharing of
revenues; in the American League, visiting teams still received 28 cents
from every ticket sold, just as they had for fifty years. Meanwhile,
visiting teams in the NFL shared 40 percent of gate receipts, after
accounting for the home team's rental fee. Bell sensed quickly that, like
the draft and the NFL's 60-40 home-visitor gate split, revenue sharing of
television receipts could provide another mechanism to equalize the
opportunity for each of the NFL's clubs to field a competitive team.

While blacking out telecasts of home games helped the gate in all
markets, Bell had grown increasingly concerned with the disparity
between the league's largest and smallest markets. In 1953, the Rams
would earn nearly $100,000 for TV rights, while the Packers were barely
clearing $5,000 for their rights. Despite his strong influence on league
affairs, Bell was unable during the remainder of the 1950s to convince
the owners to pool all their resources in a manner similar to what Veeck
envisioned.
But Veeck's idea was far from dead. By 1958, it found another
receptive listener, fellow baseball maverick Branch Rickey, who joined
forces with New York developer Bill Shea, and began to drum up support
for the Continental League, a “third major league” for baseball that
would bring the sport to a handful of previously ignored markets, as well
as partially remedy the wrenching exit of the Dodgers and Giants from
New York.
In Rickey's presentations to potential investors, he outlined a
television strategy that was an even more radical extension of Veeck's
plan, with teams keeping just one third of their TV revenues, and putting
the other two thirds into a pool to be shared equally. “It has been
reported that the American League club in New York City in 1959
realized a gross income of one million four hundred thousand dollars
from radio and television,” he noted in one speech. “The Washington
club in the same league took in approximately $125,000, yet the
Washington club plays eleven games at Yankee Stadium. How can
Washington ever expect to compete in the competitive market for player
contracts where money is king? Any rule or regulation that removes or
tends to remove the power of money to make the difference in playing
strength is a good rule. The American League cannot help itself at this
point. Neither can the National League. The proposed new third major
league has provided in its Constitution for the pooling of two-thirds of
all television receipts from what-ever source from all clubs.”
The Continental League never came to be, but the efforts of Rickey
forced major league baseball into its first round of expansion since the
turn of the century. The sport was as resistant to his television ideas as
they'd been to Veeck's, yet even as Rickey was being pushed to the
sidelines, the stage was set for a lethally ironic turnabout. Veeck's very

concept, embraced by Rickey, and explained to Hunt, was about to
become a cornerstone of a new football league.
On the plane to Miami, just weeks after hearing Rickey's Continental
League proposal, Hunt had copied out the exact television revenuesharing plan espoused by Rickey (33 percent to the team, 67 percent
shared equally with the other clubs in the league), which itself was a
refinement of the original plan offered by Veeck (50-50).
Over the next few months, Hunt and his partners settled on an easier,
more elegant way to accomplish the same goal: a single network
package, negotiated by the league office on behalf of all its teams, to be
divided equally by all teams. For whatever reason, the idea of equalizing
television revenues as a means to equalizing competitive opportunity
appealed to the son of one of the wealthiest men in the world. In 1959,
it seemed a mere detail in a large, sprawling plan, but its significance
would be borne out in time.
After neither NBC nor CBS expressed the slightest interest in a deal, Hunt
decided to approach ABC, distant third among the major networks,
without a sports division. The actual negotiation was left to the canny
agent Jay Michaels (whose son Al would one day become the bestknown play-by-play man in football), of the Music Corporation of
America, and MCA president David A. “Sonny” Werblin. In early June,
Werblin and ABC's Tom Moore met for a dinner at “21,” and hammered
out a five-year, $8.5 million deal, which would pay each club more than
$170,000, then graduate to higher levels in subsequent years, provided
that advertising targets were met. In the deal was an explicit provision
that each team would get the same amount from an overall league deal,
regardless of how many of their games reached “national” audiences.
That ABC was in the market for sports broadcasting was a happy
accident, itself a result of a cautionary tale. Boxing, a staple of Friday
night television since the inception of the medium, was finally canceled
by NBC after the 1960 spring season. Gillette, which had spent $8
million advertising its products on the Gillette Cavalcade of Sports, took
its advertising budget to ABC. Suddenly, the “Almost Broadcasting
Company” had a mother lode of ad revenue, needing only to find the

programming to go with it.
There was one other bit of good fortune for the AFL in the deal. ABC,
having no internal sports division, contracted out with Edgar Scherick,
the former CBS executive who formed his own company, called Sports
Programs Inc., in 1957. Scherick's top producer was an avid, imaginative
fan named Roone Arledge, who had a vision of football broadcasts as a
dynamic kaleidoscope of action, color, and detail. In a memo to Scherick
outlining his plans for ABC's college football coverage in the spring of
1960, Arledge wrote,“Heretofore, television has done a remarkable job
of bringing the game to the viewer—now we are going to take the
viewer to the game!! We will utilize every production technique … to
heighten the viewer's feeling of actually sitting in the stands and
participating personally in the excitement and the color.”
Arledge would bring many of the same techniques to the AFL
broadcasts. What he realized, before almost anyone else in the TV
industry, was that the games could be not only a great spectator sport or
a great television sport, but great television. And by observing many of
the conventions of dramatic television, the game could be made more
involving to the viewer. Arledge's influence wasn't noticed right away,
but it would animate the early days of the AFL broadcasts, providing
skillful, exciting coverage of a youthful, freewheeling league. And in the
first year of ABC's coverage, the main innovation Arledge brought was
cutting straight from the punter to the receiver, rather than following
the flight of the ball in the air, so that fans at home avoided seeing an
ocean of empty stadium seats, a technique that would eventually be
known, within the industry, as “AFL coverage.” The AFL, for its part,
boasted that unlike the older league, it would televise fights and injuries,
citing their news value. (Within a few years, the NFL would eventually
relax its restrictions as well.)
The AFL's innovative contract, dividing money equally, would allow
even the shakiest of franchises some revenue to stem the tide of losses.
The package itself would be a vivid testament to Rickey's philosophical
cornerstone—“Any rule or regulation that removes or tends to remove the
power of money to make the difference in playing strength is a good rule”—of
the rationale for revenue sharing.
Without ever having played a game, each of the eight teams in the

American Football League entered the 1960 season guaranteed to earn
more in television revenues than five of the venerable, established
franchises in the National Football League. This development did not go
unnoticed at the NFL offices, where the ideas of Veeck—adapted by
Rickey and reshaped by Hunt— would soon find another crucial
adherent.
It would be years before the impact was obvious, but by the beginning
of 1960, the concept had already begun to change the landscape. As
modified further, into the even simpler formula adopted by the AFL, and
later by the NFL, Veeck's idea would help launch and sustain a new
football league, spur the existing one to greater heights, sharpen the
competitive balance of both, and eventually hasten the end of baseball
as the national pastime.

8

The Siege

A

s the owners and general managers arrived at the Kenilworth Hotel
in Miami Beach for the NFL's annual meetings in January 1960, the
National Football League stood at a crossroads. The agenda was packed:
the explosive issue of expansion loomed over the proceedings, as did the
inevitable conflict over the alignment of the divisions should expansion
come to pass. The league had to hammer out a policy against a new rival
league, address the elusive possibility of a joint TV contract with CBS,
and help decide the fate of the Chicago Cardinals. But before any of
these questions could be resolved, the NFL had to select a successor to
Bert Bell. The agenda was so long that many viewed the pending vote for
the new commissioner as more of a preliminary than the main event.
In this case, the preliminaries would last for eleven days.
The meetings convened in executive session, four days before their
official beginning, with a bitter parliamentary debate between George
Halas, accompanied to the league meetings for the first time ever by his
lawyer, and George Preston Marshall, who brought his lawyer, and an
endless string of objections to the mere discussion of the expansion
question. That, and the introductions of the four cities seeking franchises
—Murchison's Dallas entry, the AFL defectors from Minneapolis-St. Paul,
plus bids from Miami and Atlanta—took much of the first three days.
It was assumed and widely reported that the new commissioner—
whose election would require a supermajority of 75 percent of the clubs
voting— would be either Austin Gunsel or Marshall Leahy. Gunsel,
acting commissioner since Bell's death, was the league's treasurer, an ex–

FBI man and longtime aide to Bell, who was well versed in his mentor's
management style—though he lacked Bell's magnetism—and content to
keep the league office in suburban Philadelphia. But many felt he was a
pale echo of Bell, and lacked the stature to be elected commissioner.
“Too much like a policeman” was the horse-track assessment of Gunsel
from the Cardinals’ Stormy Bidwill.
Out on the West Coast, support was brewing for the 49ers’ bright,
well-liked lawyer Leahy, who had been instrumental in handling the
legal details when the NFL absorbed the remnants of the All-America
Conference a decade earlier. The forty-nine-year-old Leahy was
respected as one of the rising executives of the league, but he had
publicly insisted prior to the meetings that he would only accept the job
if he could move the league offices to San Francisco, where he was
raising five daughters.
It was Wednesday afternoon, January 20, before Gunsel turned the
gavel over to the Eagles’ Joe Donoghue, and left the room, along with
Leahy, so the owners could vote on the next commissioner. The two men
sat on the couch in the Kenilworth lobby, where many of the two dozen
or so writers in attendance eagerly vetted them for information. Hours
passed and the wait grew more awkward for both men.
Inside, the discussion deteriorated into a generational and geographic
struggle, a battle between the league's supposed “old guard,” who
wanted to retain a system similar to Bell's leadership, and a “new guard”
of far-flung teams that wanted a greater voice in league business. On the
second ballot, eight votes came in for Leahy, three votes for Austin
Gunsel, and one abstention, from George Halas. The 49ers’ co-owners,
Vic and Tony Morabito, had expected to carry the day when they
secured Art Rooney as the eighth vote for Leahy. “George Halas, in my
presence, promised Vic Morabito that, ‘If you get eight votes, I'll be your
ninth,’ ” said GM Lou Spadia. “So the eighth vote was Art Rooney. So Vic
got up, walked over to Halas. And Halas wouldn't even acknowledge his
presence, wouldn't answer him. Vic kept saying, ‘You said you'd be our
ninth.’ And Halas was just mum.”
After another vote yielded the same result, Paul Brown strode over to
Halas and said, “C'mon, George, one more vote and we have this thing
licked.” At that point, Carroll Rosenbloom spoke up, warning, “George,

if you vote for Leahy, you can forget about expansion.”
This threat was a potent one—even with an amendment to the league
constitution, expansion would need the vote of ten teams to pass. Since
the Redskins and Cardinals would oppose any such vote, Halas knew he
couldn't afford to lose even one more team in support of it. More
concerned about expansion than about the identity of the next
commissioner, Halas was holding on to his vote so as not to alienate
either side for the expansion vote that would follow. The meeting moved
through eight more ballots without any significant change, adjourning to
the next day.
By the end of Thursday's debate, and six more ballots, there were a
“Solid Seven” franchises backing Leahy: San Francisco, Los Angeles,
Green Bay, Detroit, Cleveland, the Chicago Cardinals, and the New York
Giants. Pittsburgh's Art Rooney had gone back to the other side, and
joined Marshall, Rosenbloom, and Philadelphia's Frank McNamee among
those insisting they didn't want the offices moved any further west than
Chicago, where Elmer Layden had presided. And Halas continued
abstaining, on each and every subsequent vote.
That's how it remained for much of the next week, as the stalemate in
Miami Beach became a national public relations nightmare. As the days
dragged on, Miami Herald columnist Jimmy Burns wondered if the
owners had been influenced by the Miami Chamber of Commerce's
slogan “Stay through May.” League PR director Joe Labrum had to file
stories for more than one soused writer. Meanwhile, Marshall Leahy, fed
up with the stalemate and perhaps convinced that leaving the scene
would be a wise tactical maneuver, checked out of the Kenilworth,
leaving a San Francisco forwarding address and his name in nomination.
But through seven more ballots on Sunday, there was no change.
Bert Bell had once told Bert Jr. that if anything ever happened to him,
the man best qualified for his job would be Paul Brown. But stoked with
a drive to return his Browns to the top, Brown had no interest in an
administrative position, rebuffing both private and public draft efforts.
At one point, on Sunday evening, Eagles president Frank McNamee stood
up and said, “Gentlemen, Marshall Leahy is a very fine man, but there is
no way we are going to have the league office west of the Mississippi.
Now, the press is laughing at us because we can't make a decision. We

all know there's a man in this room who is qualified, and would do a hell
of a job.” Then, casting his eye down at Brown, Mc-Namee asked, “Paul
… will you take the job?”
Brown paused to look around the table for a moment, then said, “Only
if the league offices are west of the Mississippi.” The room erupted in
laughter and soon broke for another recess in what was by then
beginning to look like an interminable siege.
A vote was taken Monday morning, and another that night, the
twentysecond ballot overall, after which the positions remained locked
in and tempers had frayed. “If Jesus Christ himself came down here, you
people would still insist on Leahy!” shouted Rosenbloom.
The next morning, Tuesday, January 26, Wellington Mara and Dan
Reeves reached the conclusion that their man Leahy could not win, and
they were only prolonging their frustration by insisting upon him. They
then began to put together their own list of possible compromise
candidates, topped by the Packers’ new coach, Vince Lombardi, who'd
lifted the team from the doldrums to a 7-5 record in 1959. Lombardi had
returned to New York for a speaking commitment, so Mara and Reeves
decided they should approach Packers president Dominic Olejniczak to
see if he'd be willing to allow Lombardi's name to be put up to a vote. As
Reeves and Mara sat on the couch in the Ken-ilworth lobby, which
looked out onto the swimming pool, they dispatched Wellington's
brother, Jack Mara, to privately broach the subject of drafting Lombardi
with Olejniczak, who was then out by the pool.
From their vantage point on the couch, they couldn't see the
conversation, but a few moments after Jack went to speak to him, a
furious Olejniczak jabbed the door open and marched straight toward
the bar, and ordered a drink.
“Well,” said Reeves, looking at Mara. “Scratch Lombardi off the list.”
They had already considered and dismissed some of the other names
and were by then left with just one possibility. Sitting there silently,
looking at the fourth name on the list, Wellington Mara said, “Dan, it's
got to be Pete.”
“I think you're right,” said Reeves. “I hate to lose him, but I think he'd
do a great job.”

And with that, the movement to draft Pete Rozelle as a compromise
candidate began. Reeves had suggested Rozelle first, according to Mara,
but had done so with some reluctance. But the more Reeves considered
it, the more certain he became that Rozelle could be just the man to lead
the NFL into the next decade. His GM was skilled and savvy, and had
done a remarkable job bridging the gulf between Reeves and his coowners.
“I know he's young,” mused Reeves. “But that could help—he doesn't
have any enemies.”
In fact, Rozelle, though still the league's youngest general manager at
thirty-three, was more prepared for the job than even Reeves could have
imagined.
When the eighteen-year-old Pete Rozelle left for the service in 1944,
his father, Ray, bought one of the prefab military scrapbooks so popular
at the time, offering prideful, worried parents an outlet to catalogue
their son's military duty and progress. The book included a series of fillin-the-blank prompts to provide depth and dimension to the lives of
young men heading off to war.
Ray Rozelle filled out Pete's personal history in his precise, dashing
print, noting that his oldest son graduated with high honors from
Compton High School on June 15, 1944. He listed Pete's
accomplishments as: “Basketball, tennis, sports editor, Tartar Shield [the
school newspaper]; Sports editor, Dar-U-Gar [yearbook], 1st Place
Award, sportswriter, by Helms Foundation.” In the personal record page,
Ray Rozelle then filled out his son's pastimes. “Favorite pastime:
Baseball. Favorite sport: Basketball. As spectator: Football. Hobby: Sports.”
In earlier generations, only the monied classes could immerse
themselves in sports as youths. For others, games were a carrot: for rural
kids who'd viewed sport as a lone refuge from a long day of work, or for
the urban underclass, who saw it as a way out. Yet even as Pete Rozelle
grew up during the Depression, he found himself part of a new American
middle class, free to choose his own passions and preoccupations. And
his choice was clear. “Sports was really my life,” he'd say of his
childhood.
Alvin Ray Rozelle, oldest of the two Rozelle boys, had been born in

1926 in Lynwood, California, one of America's first true suburbs, and
nicknamed Pete by an uncle at an early age. His father, Ray Rozelle, was
a courtly, gentle man, who grew more taciturn after the failure of his
grocery store, the Pacific Market, during the Depression. Pete's mother,
Hazel Healey Rozelle, was the demonstrative sort,“an actress who never
got to be an actress,” in the words of her granddaughter, prone to
wearing long strapless gowns to almost any social occasion, the sort of
woman who colored the food green for St. Patrick's Day. Pete grew up
precociously bright, an avid reader with an agile mind and a love for
sports, which filled his days. At the family's modest stucco home at 3205
Lynwood, his younger brother, Dick, would recall “Pete hardly being
around the house—he always had something going on.”
The childhood lesson that would make the biggest impression upon
him came during a Sunday School retreat as a ten-year-old—decades
later, Rozelle would remember a camp counselor explaining “character is
what you are, and reputation is what people think you are, and
reputation is thus every bit as important as character.” Pete would allow
later that he'd “always worked very hard and tried not to alienate any
more than necessary.” But treating others well wasn't merely a trait with
Pete Rozelle. It eventually became something like an organizing
principle. “He avoided fights,” said his seventh-grade classmate Bill
Evans. “He was never in trouble because he knew how to negotiate his
way out of it. Not that he was a sissy—it was just that he disliked strife.”
At Lynwood Junior High, Pete was the smallest boy on the varsity
basketball team, but was also the student body president in the fall of
1941. In the fall of 1942, he entered eleventh grade at Compton High
School, which shared a handsome campus of cream deco-styled buildings
with Compton Junior College (the school district was then on a “6-4-4”
system, putting eleventh and twelfth graders at Compton High School on
the same campus as the freshmen and sophomores of Compton Junior
College).
As an athlete, Pete was more a participant than star, lettering twice in
basketball in junior high, and twice in tennis. But by high school, his
aspirations as a sportswriter were clear. Ray had bought a Royal
typewriter for Pete a few years earlier, and by the 1943 school year,
Rozelle had a column on the sports pages of the Tartar Shield. First called

“Pete's Repetes” and later “Sports in Review,” his still purplish
sportswriting prose was emerging in those years. (“Eddie Suggett's Tartar
hickory stick nine was very unhospitable to the visiting Pepperdine
college ball club last week as they fashioned out a wild 15–12 trackmeet
score over the Waves.”)

The school's athletic star was four-sport letterman Edwin “Duke”
Snider, who had played football for Pete's uncle Joe Rozelle at Enterprise
Junior High. Peppering the Los Angeles Times high school correspondent
John de la Vega with reports of Snider's exploits, Rozelle helped his
friend make the Times’s second-team All-City, and helped bring a raft of
baseball scouts as well. By then, Rozelle had found work during
weekends on the sports desk of the Long Beach Press-Telegram. The
impression shared by virtually all who met Rozelle in those years was
not merely that he was likable, but that he seemed mature beyond his
years, still boyishly enthusiastic but self-possessed, someone who treated
all people with respect and a warm kindness.
By high school, the war effort was increasing, and there were
antiaircraft guns and searchlights stationed up and down Century
Boulevard. Rozelle was as transformed as any of his classmates by the
prospect of world war. “Our country needs you and me,” he wrote in an
English class paper. “We must answer the call. If we do, then through
our efforts and the grace of God in heaven we will win this war and save
for the world the democratic ideals for which we stand.”
And yet, there was still the sprawling backyards and the next round of
games. There were home movies, shot in the summer of 1944, with Pete
in the front yard of his friend Daily Childs's house, lanky and freshly
scrubbed, beaming in pleated slacks, a long-sleeve shirt, and a Compton
letterman's cardigan, playing baseball soft toss with high school
classmates Childs and Louie Joseph. At the end of the short segment,
with cars lazily rolling past on the residential streets of Lynwood, the
three boys spontaneously formed a football formation, with Rozelle
snapping the baseball to Joseph and then going out for a pass. Then Pete
Rozelle got on his bicycle, smiled sheepishly for the camera, and rode off
into the late afternoon twilight. That glimpse would encapsulate much of
the golden promise of Pete Rozelle's youth.

Nothing in his two years of military duty would change it. Rozelle
registered for Selective Service on his eighteenth birthday, March 1,
1944, and took his pre-induction physical just two months later. By then,
he'd grown to a gangly six-foot and 140 pounds, with an army physician
noting Rozelle's brown hair, blue eyes, light complexion, and a small
mole on his right cheek. Reporting for active duty July 29, 1944, Rozelle
spent eighteen months aboard the oil tanker USS Guardoqui in the
Pacific, working his way up to yeoman second class, handling all the
clerical duties aboard the ship, even working on a ship newsletter. Later,
after the war, he spent a few more months aboard another ship, the USS
Audrain, early in 1946, waiting for his decommissioning.
His high school friend Max Patterson saw him when the Guardoqui
docked at Treasure Island in San Francisco. Rozelle told him about a
recent trip into port, when it was left to Rozelle, the only yeoman on
board, to assign liberty to half the sailors. “They were all climbing my
frame, saying ‘Pick me, pick me,’ ” Rozelle related. “You know, Max,
that's the first time in my life I've ever had any power. And I loved it.”
Rozelle, who saw no battle, was decommissioned in 1946, and
returned home largely unchanged by the experience. “When he came
back, it was just like he'd been to summer camp,” said his younger
brother, Dick. “He took everything in stride.”
In May 1946, Rozelle returned to civilian life and his parents’ home in
Lyn-wood, ready to begin junior college. He had already lined up the job
as Comp-ton's student athletic news director, so he dropped by the Rams’
offices and introduced himself to Bill John, the business manager who'd
traveled with the team from Cleveland. Rozelle secured a job to help out
around the Rams’ training camp, and wound up working so many hours
that John would eventually challenge them. Rozelle was unfazed. “Pay
me whatever you want to pay me,” he said. By the end of the summer,
he'd been hired by John to put together the Rams’ programs for the 1946
season, at $50 per game. Throughout the camp he was a constant
presence, ever-watching and ready to help, soaking in the sights and
sounds of professional football. When Sport magazine came to Compton
for a cover story on Tom Harmon and his Hollywood starlet wife, Elyse
Knox, the photographer created a fans-in-the-stands tableau with
Harmon, fully decked out in his uniform, sitting in the front row with his

arm around Knox. At the edge of that cover shot, a partially obscured
Rozelle can be seen, sitting two rows behind Harmon, broad smile on his
face.
When the team offered him tickets for the Rams game against the
College All-Stars in Chicago, Rozelle set out with his friend John
Lehman. They spent a week in Evanston, rooming at the YMCA, and Pete
spent much of his time with Jane Coupe, a poised, comely art student
he'd met during an earlier stop in Chicago. Rozelle returned not just
smitten but deeply in love. Jane eventually followed him to California,
where three years later they were married.
In the spring of 1948, Rozelle was working as the Compton
undergraduate athletic news director when he met Pete Newell, the
basketball coach at the University of San Francisco. Newell was down in
Compton scouting talent at a junior college tournament and was
impressed by the young Rozelle's professional air. “When you'd go scout
somebody, you were lucky to get a seat,” said Newell. “But Pete had hot
coffee for us, he had all the statistics. He was so far ahead of what
anyone else was doing at the time.” When Bill Grant, the previous
athletic news director at the University of San Francisco (and himself a
Compton graduate), left in 1948, Newell recommended Rozelle for the
position, which included a full-ride scholarship. It would prove to be
another in a series of serendipitous turns in Rozelle's career. Finishing
his undergraduate education at USF, he was steeped for the first time in
the challenging academic atmosphere offered by the Jesuits. And for $75
a month and all his school expenses, Rozelle worked as USF's student
athletic news director at a time when the school was rising to national
prominence in both basketball and football.
When the Dons basketball team marched to the National Invitation
Tournament title in 1949, Rozelle was the conduit with the national
media, and perfectly framed the Cinderella story for what Newell would
describe as a “mesmerized Eastern press.” That same year, the
newlyweds Pete and Jane moved to a small two-room apartment near
the campus.
In 1951, the lightly regarded Dons began the football season 4-0 and
traveled to Yankee Stadium for a game against perennial Eastern power
Fordham. Rozelle showed up at seven newspaper offices in the city,

advancing the game and praising the Dons as one of the best football
teams in the country, with a particular emphasis on USF's fleet, powerful
halfback Ollie Matson. For the legendary Grantland Rice, Rozelle went a
step further. He stopped by Rice's New York apartment, and escorted
him personally to the Randalls Island stadium for the game, then
brought him home after USF's 32–26 win.

The glorious 9-0 season was a coda to the era of great Jesuit football
teams. USF suspended its football program early in 1952, citing
staggering losses, and a diminishing number of like-sized independents
(both Loyola and St. Mary's had “de-emphasized” earlier) on the West
Coast.
Yet again, Rozelle's timing was perfect. In Los Angeles, the Rams’
publicity director Te x Maule had just returned to Texas to take a similar
job with the old Dallas Texans. Tex Schramm, serving as general
manager, remembered hearing about the skilled kid from San Francisco,
and hired Rozelle as the publicity director for the 1952 season. On the
Rams, Rozelle fell under the tutelage of Reeves and Schramm, and
quickly moved beyond his role in publicity, helping the team throughout
the year with its vast scouting operations.
And yet for a time, it seemed as if his career would bring him
elsewhere. Even after leaving San Francisco, Rozelle continued to
correspond with the San Francisco public relations executive Ken
Macker, a polished, engaging sportsman who'd been a boyhood friend of
Pete Newell's.
Heavily influenced by the works of public relations pioneer Edward
Bernays, Macker and a generation of young executives were convinced
that there was a calling in public relations much higher than the snakeoil sales pitches of publicists, press agents, and ad salesmen. They
envisioned public relations serving as a modern conduit between
businesses and their customers, a field that would combine social science
findings and journalistic principles in a manner that would allow
companies to frame their message in a more coherent and eloquent
manner.
Macker had for years been hoping to start his own company, and in
January 1955, the international public relations firm of P. K. Macker and

Co. was launched, with headquarters in San Francisco and offices in New
York and Los Angeles. Macker lured Rozelle as a partner, giving him a
sizable raise (from his $6,500 with the Rams, to $9,600 a year with an
annual bonus and a chance to buy a 10 percent stake in the company).

Within months, Rozelle was hard at work handling publicity for the
1956 Olympic Games in Melbourne on behalf of the Victoria Promotion
Committee, the Australian government body overseeing the Games. He
escorted Aussie miler John Landy around the U.S. for a series of media
appearances that proved a rousing success.
By the end of the 1956 Olympics, Macker and Co. had established
itself as a prestigious, growing firm, with such big-name accounts as
Qantas Airlines, videotape innovators Ampex, and the international
brewer San Miguel. Rozelle was a rising executive in the world of public
relations, traveled frequently to New York, and was well acquainted
with the advertising and television industries.
He might well have stayed at Macker, but for the call in 1957 from
Bert Bell. Bridling under the constant bickering between Reeves and his
partners, and dispirited by Reeves's drinking binges, Tex Schramm had
resigned as the Rams’ GM to accept an offer from CBS's Bill MacPhail,
and moved to New York to work for CBS Sports. After Reeves had
rejected all of Ed Pauley's suggestions for GM, and Pauley and the other
owners had refused all of Reeves's suggestions, Bell intervened and
suggested Rozelle, whom he'd remembered fondly as a gracious and
extremely competent PR man. So that neither side would be seen to have
the upper hand, it was determined that Bell would be the one to make
the offer to Rozelle. “You're the first thing they've agreed on since
Garfield was shot,” said Bell.
Returning in April 1957 to the team's cozy offices on Beverly
Boulevard, Rozelle immediately set about solving problems and
smoothing over old disagreements. He presided over a settlement
between a group of disaffected veterans threatening to hold out over
training camp pay, and convinced the Rams’ ownership to make some
overdue concessions, by which players would receive $50 per exhibition
game, have their per diem increased from $6 to $9, and receive half a
year's premium for each player's health insurance, which at the time was
still the sole responsibility of the player.

In place of Schramm's booming voice and occasionally brusque
demeanor, Rozelle strived for inclusiveness, and brought to the offices a
kind of easy, chipper professionalism. He sent handwritten Christmas
notes to everyone on the team payroll, going beyond perfunctory
season's greetings to mention how each person had helped the club that
year, and express his appreciation for it.

Rozelle's presence stabilized the stormy ownership situation in Los
Angeles. Actual relations between Reeves and the other owners didn't
really im-prove—Pauley and Reeves wouldn't ride on the same elevator
to the Coliseum press box on game days—but communication between
the two camps did. Rozelle earned the good graces of both factions, and
Reeves often referred to him as “the most honest man I've ever known.”
Under Rozelle, every aspect of the Rams’ public presentation exhibited
a high-gloss polish. For the team's programs and yearbooks, he hired a
gifted, versatile graphic artist named David Boss, a lanky, urbane Texan
who was as enchanted as Rozelle with the romance and action of
football. Around the same time, Rozelle met a bluff, likable salesman
named Larry Kent, a representative for Roy Rogers, Inc., the highly
successful licensing company that by the late ’50s was responsible for
the licensing of $30 million annually in Roy Rogers clothing, toys,
games, and promotions. Through Kent, Rozelle helped set up the Rams
Store, a corner storefront just a block away from the team's offices on
Beverly Boulevard, which sold everything from T-shirts ($1.25) to
earrings ($3.95) to highball glasses ($7.95 for a set of eight), all
emblazoned with the Rams’ emblem. The most popular item was a
novelty called a bobble-head doll ($1.00), a six-inch-tall ceramic
statuette of a smiling football player, whose oversized helmeted head
bobbled on a spring.
The Rams had already become profitable by Rozelle's arrival, but his
promotional and public relations savvy helped accelerate that growth.
Before the Colts-Giants 1958 title game that supposedly put the NFL on
the map, the Rams under Rozelle had drawn four crowds of larger than
95,000 to the cavernous Coliseum—including a record 102,368 to a
49ers game in 1957—and had become the most profitable club in pro
football.
Within six months of returning to Southern California, Jane was

pregnant. Anne Marie Rozelle (she would add the “e” to her first name
as an adult) was born on September 28, 1958. Pete left a game to go to
the hospital at halftime, with the Rams leading, and returned just in time
to see Lou Groza kick a field goal, to lift the Browns to a 30–27 win late
in the fourth quarter.

The world he'd grown up dreaming about had become a reality. And
the distinctive culture of pro football had exerted its pull on him. Rozelle
had to admit that he was transfixed with the myriad variables of
competition that made up life in the NFL. “Pro football,” he would say
flatly, “is the most fascinating thing in the world.”
In his three years as GM of the Rams, Rozelle improved the team's
fortunes in virtually every way except on the field. He'd made his biggest
splash by trading eleven players for the Cardinals’ star running back,
former University of San Francisco classmate Ollie Matson. But though
Matson was a productive runner in 1958, he couldn't stop the club's
decline in 1959.
The Rams were co-favorites to win the West in 1959, but the season
began badly, with a narrow loss to the Giants at home, and a shocking
34–0 loss at the hands of San Francisco on the road. Though they won
their next two games, the season became unhinged with three close
losses during a three-game homestand, the beginning of an eight-game
losing skid to end the season. Dan Reeves had been sitting in the Rams’
locker room after the season's final game, a 45–26 blowout loss to the
Colts. Reeves wasn't angry, only sad to be there, to have to tell Sid
Gillman he was being fired. Throughout the Rams’ organization,
Gillman's inability to repeat the conference title of 1955 was mystifying.
He was a consummate tactical coach, and many of the players liked him.
The team's scouts believed they had among the best talent in the league.
And while Bill Wade had been unable to replicate the brilliance at
quarterback of Bob Water-field and Norm Van Brocklin, that deficiency
hardly seemed to account for the 2-10 record of a club that many tabbed
as a contender.
It was an equally agonizing moment for Rozelle, for whom the entire
fall had been a protracted torment. But a GM's job was to work for next
year, even when the present one was in shambles. He spent long nights
prepping for the 1960 draft (which the NFL secretly held in November,

to compete with the earlier AFL draft). With the first overall pick, the
Rams selected LSU halfback and Heisman winner Billy Cannon.
Cannon's experience that fall would foreshadow the chaotic future years
of pro football. Though the NFL had for decades lived by the agreement
that it would not sign players until their college eligibility had been
exhausted, the challenge from the AFL prompted many GMs and
personnel directors around the country to jump the gun, secretly
negotiating prior to the draft, and before the New Year's bowl games, to
sign players to contracts.
On November 30, Cannon—traveling under the alias of Billy Gunn—
checked into the Warwick Hotel in Philadelphia for a secret negotiation
with the Rams. Rozelle signed Cannon to a contract with a $10,000
bonus, a $500 check to cover travel expenses, and three one-year
contracts at $15,000 per year. They agreed the undated contract would
not take effect until after LSU faced Mississippi in the Sugar Bowl
January 1, but even that understanding was confidential, since signing
the contract would have made Cannon ineligible for the Sugar Bowl, and
violated the NFL's agreement with the NCAA.
Back in Houston, Oilers owner Bud Adams was growing frustrated.
He'd spent weeks trying to reach Cannon, his first-round “territorial
selection” in the AFL draft. Repeated calls to Cannon's dorm room, his
parents’ house, his girlfriend's house had all yielded nothing. So in midDecember, he decided to take another tack, and let money do the
talking.
He phoned a health club that Cannon frequented in Baton Rouge, run
by Alvin Roy, a pioneer in football strength conditioning who would
later work for several pro teams.
“I'm sure he wants to talk to you, Bud,” said Roy. “I know he's been
real busy with all his commitments.”
“Well, you just tell him this,” said Adams. “I don't know if he's signed
with the Rams yet or he hasn't. Doesn't make any difference, they're not
going to do anything about it. Just tell him I'll give him double whatever
they gave him to sign with him. Here's my phone number, tell him to
call me collect.”

It was about 5:00 p.m. then, and after getting off the phone, Adams
turned to his wife and said,“I bet you I'll get a long-distance call from
Billy Cannon in the next hour.” Thirty minutes later the phone rang,
with an operator asking Adams if he'd accept a long-distance call from a
Billy Cannon.

“Oh, I'd be happy to.”
After Cannon reluctantly admitted to Adams that he had signed an
agreement with the Rams, Adams explained that the NFL knew its
contract was improper, and that “we can get around that.” True to his
word, Adams doubled the Rams’ deal, offering a $20,000 bonus, and a
three-year deal at $30,000 each, for a package of $110,000, to which
Cannon quickly agreed.
The Oilers then conceived a stunt designed to cause the older league
maximum embarrassment. They arranged to sign Cannon immediately
upon the completion of the Sugar Bowl, on the Tulane Stadium field, in
front of a national television audience. The signing would come at the
earliest possible time that Cannon could sign after his eligibility was up.
Then if the Rams claimed they'd already signed him, they would be
admitting they'd done so improperly.
Rozelle first heard rumors about the Oilers deal when he arrived in
New Orleans for the game, where his attempts to meet privately with
Cannon proved fruitless. On New Year's Day, LSU played its rematch
with Mississippi in the Sugar Bowl, and when the final gun sounded, an
outwardly calm Rozelle hurried around the field looking for Cannon.
Meanwhile, the best-known college football player in the nation walked
to the end zone. There, under the goalposts, on national television,
Cannon signed a contract with the Oilers.
A few minutes later, Rozelle greeted Cannon in the locker room and
put his arm around Cannon's shoulders. “Well, Billy, it's going to be
awfully nice having you with us in Los Angeles.”
“But I just signed with the Houston Oilers,” said Cannon, confirming
Rozelle's worst fears.
As reporters crowded around Cannon's locker, Rozelle stood by,
composed but expressing a look of deep regret. “Billy,” he said softly at
one point, “don't say anything you'll regret later.”

The Rams sued the AFL, claiming Cannon was already under contract.
The lawsuit, heard in Los Angeles County Court, eventually ruled in
favor of Cannon and the Oilers, with whom he began the 1960 season.
But even before the case began, the job had begun to weigh heavily on
Rozelle. His disappointment over the season, his sadness at watching his
friend Gillman's firing, the pressure to find a worthy successor, and the
struggle to secure Cannon's services combined to leave him not only
exhausted, but profoundly frustrated, and unusually ambivalent about
his future.
His friend John Lehman was convinced that Rozelle was considering a
return to journalism, and it was obvious that the job, like the previous
one, had become a major strain on his marriage. And yet, as Rozelle
boarded the plane for Miami on January 16, his plans were clear: in a
week, his wife, Jane, would pack their swimsuits, her watercolors, and
his copy of Ian Fleming's latest, Thunderball, drop off their daughter,
Anne, with Pete's parents, and join him in Miami. From there, they'd
take off to begin their much needed vacation, a one-week getaway to
Jamaica.
That was still the plan on Tuesday afternoon, January 26, when Dan
Reeves quietly sidled up to Rozelle, and asked him to step outside for a
moment.
To say that Rozelle was a dark horse candidate for the vacant
commissioner's chair would be a misrepresentation. Until Reeves and
Wellington Mara discussed him while casting about for possible
compromise choices, Rozelle was not a candidate at all. For much of the
time at the Kenilworth, he was a face in the crowd, a young GM who
had to leave the room when the owners entered into executive session.
As late as the morning of his election, he was identified as Los Angeles
Rams general manager “Pete Rosele” in a stray quote in the Miami
Herald, where he appeared primarily because he was one of the few
team officials still milling around the hotel lobby. The circumstances
that led to Rozelle's election were unprecedented, unanticipated, and
unforeseeable.
But once the idea was raised, it quickly gained support. Paul Brown
and Jack Mara also liked the young Rozelle and, during the lunch break
that day, they joined Reeves and Wellington Mara in asking Rozelle to

step outside for a private talk.
“Pete,” Brown said, “we've been talking about this. We'd like to put
your name up as an ideal compromise candidate.”
Rozelle looked at the group, eyes widening. “You've got to be
kidding,” he said. “That's the most ludicrous thing I've ever heard.” They
convinced him they were serious, and explained why they thought he
would make a good choice. After a few moments of reflection, Rozelle's
initial response was that he didn't think he could be elected, and he
didn't want to be embarrassed by being rejected.
“Don't worry about being embarrassed,” said Paul Brown. “We won't
put your name up until we're sure you're going to get elected.”
Rozelle returned to his hotel room down the street at the Balmoral,
where Jane had taken a bus tour of the city in the morning. With a
bashful smile, he said, “This has really been a strange meeting. Guess
who they're talking about as a candidate now.”
“You,” she said instantly. “Alvin Ray Rozelle.”
While Jane didn't try to talk him out of it, over the course of the
afternoon, others would. But after speaking with CBS executive Bill
MacPhail, Rozelle told Brown, Reeves, and the Maras that, with some
trepidation, he'd be willing to be considered. It was Brown, again, who
was most reassuring. “Pete,” he said, “don't worry—you'll grow into it.”
Once they had a candidate, the group returned to the Kenilworth to
drum up support. The first stop was Well Mara's visit to Art Rooney.
Rozelle's name was so far off the radar that the Steelers’ owner at first
looked puzzled, before realizing Mara was talking about the Rams’
bright young GM.
Rooney in turn agreed to present the Solid Seven's choice to the
Eagles’ Frank McNamee.
“Frank, they want to get out of here,” said Rooney. “They're ready to
come off Leahy. They think we should go for Pete Rozelle.”
“Great,” said a weary McNamee. “Who the hell is Pete Rozelle?”
“I don't really know him, either,” said Rooney, “but if Well says he's
okay, that's good enough for me.”
That evening, as the owners reconvened in the conference room for

the twenty-third ballot, Rozelle was excused so that his nomination
might be discussed. With the phalanx of reporters waiting in the nearby
lobby, sure to seize on any possible clue, he could hardly go there. So he
went to the men's re-stroom across the hall from the conference room
and waited. When a writer or hotel guest came in the bathroom, Rozelle
would look in the mirror, adjust his tie and wash his hands, very
carefully and very deliberately, waiting for the other person to finish his
business and leave. Then Rozelle would stay. By his own estimate, he
washed his hands thirty-five times over the next half-hour, before Carroll
Rosenbloom walked into the men's room and greeted him with an
outstretched hand and the words, “Hello, Mr. Commissioner.”
Returning to the conference room for greetings and congratulations,
Rozelle would utter the famous line, “I can honestly say I come to you
with clean hands.” The meeting quickly adjourned and Rozelle was
rushed to an impromptu press conference.
Rozelle announced that he strongly supported expansion, and that
after a year or more of transition, he would eventually hope to move the
league offices to New York City.
Even as he paid his respects to Bell, he also made it clear that he was
not going to try to operate in the way his predecessor had. When asked
about Bell's unique operating style, his ability to keep all the league's
business in his head and back pocket, Rozelle smiled and allowed, “I
think I'll have files.” About the challenge of succeeding Bell, he was
unabashedly humble. “I hesitate calling it a challenge,” he said later.
“That would sound ludicrous. It is much more than a challenge and if I
can come close to filling Bert Bell's shoes, I'll have to be luckier than
ever before.”
But the next morning, he took the gavel and, in an instantly more
formal and businesslike manner than had been the case under Bell or
Gunsel, led the proceedings, navigating the straits of expansion with
assurance. In short order, the league ratified expansion, with Dallas
coming into the league in 1960 and Minneapolis-St. Paul in 1961. Other
matters were tabled, though Rozelle told the owners that he strongly
supported a package television deal for the league.
“We knew within twenty-four hours,” said Wellington Mara, “that we

hadn't made a mistake.”
At 12:25 a.m. on Friday, January 28—twelve days after the meetings
started— Rozelle banged the gavel to end the 1960 annual meetings. As
the owners left the room, George Halas offered a piece of advice. “Get a
pullout telephone,” said Papa Bear. “There's no sense answering calls at
four in the morning.”
Much of the national press couldn't help but jump to the conclusion
that anyone so young and so pleasant would have to be a callow,
ineffectual leader. The consensus was that Rozelle—“The Child Czar” in
more than one tabloid headline—was little more than a place-holding
figurehead.“New NFL Boss— Monarch or Mouthpiece?” asked the main
headline in the February 8, 1960, edition of The Sporting News, with a
subhead noting, “Former Tub-Thumper Seen as Spokesman; Magnates
No Longer Need Dictator.” “The first test,” wrote Sid Ziff in the Los
Angeles Mirror News, “may come when George Halas tries to run the
works next season. Bert Bell never crossed him. Will Rozelle take a
chance?”
There had always been about Rozelle an aspect of the perfect
companion. Loyal, boyish, bright, and avid, he possessed a disarming
manner. It would be said about him later that his most redeeming
quality was his persistent likability. But this was selling him short. He
possessed both a gravitas and a sense of self. The sun-dappled, freshscrubbed wholesomeness of his youth had matured into a more
cosmopolitan assuredness. Milk shakes and ice cream gave way to Rusty
Nails and cigarettes. But his face still shone with that sincere, inclusive
smile. He was a nice, smart man, who embodied much of the hopes,
dreams, aspirations, and sensibilities of postwar Americans.
That he had a tendency to be in the right place at the right time was
undeniable. His election required so many distinct elements—Leahy's
intransigence, the Eastern clubs’ refusal to move the league offices out
west, Halas's commitment to expansion, Brown's reluctance to a draft
effort—as to be nearly accidental.
Pete Rozelle was aware that one impasse among owners had brought
him back into pro football, and another one had elevated him to its

highest office. He was convinced that for a commissioner to succeed, he
would have to find a way to settle those stalemates. Rozelle was not soft,
and not merely genial; the man who got along so well also understood
how to get what he wanted from people, and would soon prove himself
to be a tough executive, capable of Machiavellian maneuvering and
brutally firm leadership. He was smart, assured, and insightful, bringing
a degree of sophistication to the office that hadn't previously existed.
And he possessed a vision of the future that pointedly did not involve
cramped offices in suburban Philadelphia or long nights spent
manipulating dominoes to fashion a league schedule.
After the long siege, the old heads had finally seized on a compromise
of convenience. But in the same stroke, the National Football League
had, almost unwittingly, delivered itself to the future.

9

The New Frontier

F

orrest Gregg had just returned to Dallas after his second pro season
with the Green Bay Packers, when he heard the news, in January
1959, that the team had fired coach Ray “Scooter” McLean, and hired
New York Giants assistant coach Vince Lombardi. A few days later, the
smart, agile offensive lineman was out shopping when he ran into fellow
Southern Methodist alum and ex-Giant Tiny Goss.
“Hey, Forrest,” said Goss, “y'all got a new coach.”
“Yeah,” said Gregg. “Vince Lombardi.”
“Y'all know anything about him?”
“No, I don't. Do you?”
Goss smiled. “Yeah. He is a real bastard.”
Gregg filed this information away along with the few other bits of
information he'd been able to glean about Lombardi. In an age before
media saturation, when players had little contact with their teams
during the off-season, much of what a player could learn about a new
coach came from word of mouth. Gregg still hadn't met Lombardi, seven
months later, when he set off with teammate John Symank for the
Packers’ training camp at St. Norbert's College, just outside Green Bay.
Driving up from Texas, they reached Milwaukee, about 120 miles from
camp, by nightfall, still two days prior to the date when veterans had to
report. “We decided before we made a determination to stay all night in
Milwaukee and drive up on to Green Bay in the morning, we'd call
[teammate] Dave Hanner. We called Dave up and said, ‘Dave, what's

going on?’ He just said,‘Wow.’ I said,‘What do you mean?’ He said, ‘He's
working our tail off.’ I said, ‘We're in Milwaukee, we're thinking about
whether we're going to stay or drive on in.’ Dave said, ‘My suggestion to
you would be to drive on in.’ ”
Gregg and Symank arrived after one in the morning and told the dorm
attendant who checked them into camp that, because it was so late, they
were going to sleep in.
At seven o'clock in the morning, wake-up time throughout camp, there
was a loud rap on their door, summoning the players to the 7:30
breakfast. When they arrived at the cafeteria, Packers GM Jack Vainisi
spotted them, and brought them over to meet Lombardi.
“I went over there,” said Gregg, “and he was kind of a short guy, had a
real nice smile, very pleasant. ‘Glad to have you guys here, glad you
came in early. Pleased to meet you. Practice is at ten.’ I hadn't been
planning on even having breakfast, much less practicing. But after he
said it I thought it was probably a pretty good idea.”
Just that quickly, the Vince Lombardi legend was growing.
In 1960, pro football nearly doubled itself, the twelve teams of 1959
multiplying to twenty-one a year later. The financial boom and the
growth of the American middle class made the explosion possible, and
the sense of a new era dawning was heightened by a new commissioner,
a new rival league, and, in the country at large, a presidential campaign
that would bring a new president to the White House.
The tension between the sport's past and future was felt most acutely
in Green Bay, Wisconsin, where a pervasive gloom surrounded the team
throughout much of the ’50s. While the jet-powered cosmopolitan world
of postwar America was taking shape, the small central Wisconsin burg
of 62,000 people seemed willfully rooted in a Rockwellian portrait of an
earlier era, isolated from the bustle of modern urban life, still
remarkably homogenous (only 128 blacks lived in the county in 1959)
and stubbornly proud of it.
The city's claim to fame—that it was the last of the small industry
towns to still have a major professional sports team—seemed

increasingly tenuous by the late ’50s. The NFL's only publicly held
franchise was a living testament to the league's heritage, and yet there
was a feeling among many in the league that the team wouldn't be able
to compete for much longer. Though their personnel department, run by
the sharp Jack Vainisi, had enjoyed a series of productive drafts, Green
Bay had the smallest payroll in the league, and made far less television
money than most other clubs.
Green Bay's last NFL title had come during the lean, war-depleted
season of 1944. After posting a 6-5-1 mark in 1947, the Packers suffered
eleven consecutive losing seasons, during which their 37-93-2 record
was the worst in the NFL. For most of that time, they played their games
in City Stadium (with a capacity of 24,500), next to Green Bay East High
School, whose field was closely surrounded by an oval handrail,
meaning that players running out of bounds at full speed knew they had
to quickly slide down to avoid a jarring and potentially injurious
collision. The move into the new City Stadium (later renamed Lambeau
Field after patriarch Curly Lambeau) had drawn headlines in 1957. Even
Bert Bell, who wouldn't fly, took the train in from Philadelphia to be on
hand, but the Packers continued to lose.
Forrest Gregg, arriving in 1957, had been disappointed with what he
thought was a lack of general fitness among pro players and a lack of
seriousness toward the profession that pervaded his first two seasons in
Green Bay. McLean ran light workouts for his players in the day and
played long poker games with them at night. During practices, if one of
the team's veterans thought McLean was pressing too hard, he might
remark, “Long season, coach,” and McLean would, shortly thereafter if
not immediately, end the practice.
After the 1-10-1 1958 campaign, feeling that they needed to break
from the past, the Packers pursued and hired Lombardi, the top offensive
assistant on the Giants’ staff. He came highly recommended from around
the league, even from a reluctant George Halas. “I shouldn't tell you this,
Ole,” Halas confided to Packers president Dominic Olejniczak, “but he'll
be a good one. I shouldn't tell you because you're liable to kick the crap
out of us!” In that Halas would prove prophetic.

At St. Norbert's in 1959, Gregg saw a team instantly transformed, and a
training camp environment in which none of the old rules applied. On
the first day of camp in which all the veterans participated, Lombardi's
volcanic temper revealed itself. The victim was wide receiver Max
McGee, who after running a pass route, started walking back to the
huddle.

“GET BACK OVER THERE!” howled Lombardi. “Mister, we don't
WALK around here—we run!”
What startled Gregg about Lombardi's tantrum wasn't the volume, or
even the relatively slight transgression that inspired it, but the target. “I
had never heard a coach, in my two years at Green Bay and in
professional football, ever say anything derogatory to a wide receiver or
a running back. Most of the guys who got grief were offensive linemen,
defensive linemen, linebackers. I thought to myself, ‘I can handle this.
We're all the same.’ I knew from then on, we had something different
than we had before, and we got a chance. We had some good talent on
the team; we just needed direction.”
There was a daunting ferocity to Lombardi's approach that was a
departure from the standard practice of his contemporaries. He
possessed the stereotypical fiery temper of the old-school coaches, but
none of the emotional distance. A coach “must be a pedagogue,” he
said.“He has to pound the lessons into the players by rote, the same way
you teach pupils in the classroom.” Paul Brown had much the same
philosophy, but lacked the galvanizing emotionalism of Lombardi's
combustible persona.
Lombardi's philosophy was one of stripped-down fundamentals, an
unstinting emphasis on execution and repetition, so that the plays his
teams ran were perfectly choreographed and flexible works of physical
art, each with their own options and variations built in. Within that
context, his contribution to the game's strategic and tactical evolution
came to be known as the delayed option, or option blocking. Instead of
static blocking assignments, Lombardi's system often allowed his
offensive linemen the flexibility to block a man in whatever direction
was convenient, then leave it up to the trailing runner to find the
resulting hole once he got the ball. Lombardi called the concept
“running to daylight.”

Returning many of the players on the squad that won a single game in
1958, the Packers went 7-5 in 1959, and Lombardi was named Coach of
the Year. He had adroitly utilized his personnel, putting Paul Hornung in
as his feature halfback, in much the same manner that Frank Gifford had
been in New York, and settling on the taciturn, steely Bart Starr, a lateround draft choice out of Alabama, as his quarterback. A pair of
fleecings of the Cleveland Browns—acquiring defensive lineman Henry
Jordan in 1959 and offensive lineman Willie Davis (shifted to defense,
where he'd enjoy a Hall of Fame career) in 1960—helped solidify the
defense. In 1960, the Packers won the Western Conference title, and
battled the Philadelphia Eagles to the end in the NFL championship
game, before losing, 17–13.
A year later, the Packers added the distinctive oval G to their helmets,
and as they rose to the first of back-to-back titles, the team and the town
became a kind of iconographic reminder of the power of American small
towns. Starr, Hornung, backfield mate Jim Taylor, and defensive anchor
Ray Nitschke were all becoming stars, but no one was bigger than the
hard-driving, eminently quotable Lombardi. After the Packers routed the
Giants, 37–0, in the 1961 NFL title game, Lombardi received a telegram
that read: “Congratulations on a great game. It was a fine victory for a
great coach, a great team, a great town. Best regards, President
Kennedy.”
While one dynasty was forming in Green Bay, another was in the
works at the league's new headquarters in New York City.
Rozelle's “transitional year” in Philadelphia turned out to be little
more than a spring vacation. On April 5, 1960, after adjourning the NFL
meetings in Los Angeles in March (during which the Chicago Cardinals
received permission to move their franchise to St. Louis), the Rozelles
took an overnight flight from Los Angeles to Philadelphia, where they
stayed for the next few weeks at a suite in the Warwick Hotel. By the
end of May, they'd leased a six-room apartment at 16 Sutton Place in
New York City.
In July, the NFL office opened its new headquarters in midtown
Manhattan, on the twenty-third floor of the General Dynamics Building
at Rockefeller Center. The contrast between the old and the new NFL
offices wasn't limited to location. In the place of Bell's slangy authority,

there was the distinctly more formal Rozelle administration, in which
the commissioner, once in the office, never removed his suit coat or tie.
He was joined in New York by his executive secretary with the Rams,
Thelma Elkjer, a loyal, gifted assistant whose role as gatekeeper became
all the more important in the new job. Rozelle arrived early and stayed
late, and handled much of his correspondence in carefully worded
typewritten communiqués—the drafts batted out in his distinctive alllower-case style, then retyped by Elkjer.
In New York, Rozelle was close to the advertising, television, and
publishing industries, a mass media community already galvanized by
the rise of pro football and the concurrent Giants renaissance that would
put them in six title games in eight seasons. Rozelle quickly solidified
important friendships with key executives like Jack Landry at Philip
Morris, one of the league's main advertisers, and Bill MacPhail, head of
sports at CBS. Both were visionaries in their respective fields, and both
would be key confidants in the decade ahead.
Landry was a hale man with ruddy complexion and a robust, cheerful
demeanor who'd conceived the “Marlboro Man,” which would become
one of the most successful campaigns in American advertising history. At
a press conference in 1962, a writer spied Rozelle smoking Marlboros
and asked him if it was a coincidence that he was using a product
advertised on NFL games.
“Well,” said Rozelle, smiling, “before I became commissioner I smoked
Viceroys.”
More crucial to the league's rising prominence was MacPhail, the
affable bachelor with a soft face, a sharp wit, and a longshoreman's
capacity for alcohol. As the head of CBS Sports, he had indirectly
prompted Rozelle's return to the NFL, by hiring Tex Schramm away from
the Rams in 1957. In 1960 and 1961, MacPhail would be Rozelle's main
outside ally as he confronted his most important early challenge—trying
to convince the NFL owners to adopt a single-network joint television
package similar in structure to the AFL's, with league members to share
equally the revenue that would be realized.
Meanwhile, Rozelle began to completely revamp the NFL's relationship
with the media. With his dual background in newspapers and public

relations, he understood the inner workings of mass communication with
a level of sophistication that his predecessor couldn't have matched. In
the spring of 1960, he called the first meeting of the league's publicity
directors, and gently reached an agreement with the league's aging PR
man Joe Labrum that he would serve in his capacity one more year and
then accept an attractive retirement package.

Shortly after the end of the 1960 season, Rozelle had a meeting with
Jim Kensil, the brawny, self-assured correspondent for the Associated
Press, who wrote a weekly sports media column, perhaps the first of its
kind, called “The Sports Dial.” By 1961, the column had grown in
influence, especially in the sports television industry, and Rozelle was an
avid reader. That spring, Kensil interviewed Rozelle for one of his
columns and the two men proved temperamentally well matched. They
spoke again two days later, by phone, about the strengths and
weaknesses of the NFL's past publicity efforts. Rozelle was already
intrigued, convinced that Kensil could be just the man to orchestrate the
more sophisticated and aggressive approach he was seeking for the
league's press relations. Kensil beat him to the punch, saying, “What you
need there is somebody like me. I'd like to run your show.”
The hiring raised eyebrows among the New York press corps; Kensil
was a respected print man with no background in public relations, a
calling still viewed with suspicion by many writers. In a letter to his
friend Arnold Zeitlin, a correspondent for UPI, Kensil explained himself:
“The job is mine, no strings…. The salary is nice. The office is great. And
best of all, I like pro football better than any other sport. Honestly, it is
one of the few jobs I would have quit for. I couldn't do public relations
for garden tools, cosmetics or garbage disposals, but pro football is
another matter. I can believe in it.”
In Kensil, Rozelle would find more than a public relations conduit. He
would find another true believer with a fierce conviction in the
superiority of pro football as a spectator sport. In the years ahead, he
became Rozelle's most trusted office adviser, confidant, and sounding
board,“Mr. Inside” to the commissioner's “Mr. Outside.” In that offseason prior to 1961, Rozelle and Kensil rebuilt the NFL's publicity
apparatus, quickly transcending the inherent limitations of Labrum's
folksy manner and modest mimeographed weekly statistical summaries.

The same summer, Rozelle hired the Elias Sports Bureau, the statistical
arbiter for Major League Baseball. It was a major expense, but one that
almost immediately paid off, not merely because the statistics were more
accurate, but because newspapers treated them with greater respect.

Kensil increased the quality of the information the NFL distributed to
all media outlets. He took advantage of new breakthroughs in Teletype
capability at the major wire services (distributing news stories would no
longer require a typesetter to retype them for use in a local paper),
sending extensive weekly NFL stats to hundreds of newspapers instead of
a handful. To capitalize on the heightened interest in the game, he
started giving newspaper editors a steady diet of NFL preview and
statistical features, and beginning in 1961 ran a weekly “capsule
preview” of each game played in the coming weekend.
Even before the 1961 season was underway, the Pittsburgh PostGazette’s Jack Sell noted that Kensil had “started a long-needed flow of
information about the various players, accenting personalities rather
than statistics.” Kensil's “handouts,” as he called them, not only provided
the media with more to write about, but also did so in a professionally
written format without any obvious boosterism. Some newspapers even
took to simply running the press releases verbatim.
The rise of pro football broke into the broader general media in that
1960 season. When Maule collaborated with the sports photographer
and illustrator Robert Riger for a coffee-table book titled The Pros, SI ran
a cover story with a seven-page portfolio of black-and-white
photographs from the book. Later in October, a CBS News special titled
“The Violent World of Sam Huff ” aired on its Sunday evening program
The Twentieth Century. “Today, you will play pro football, riding on Sam
Huff's broad back,” intoned narrator Walter Cronkite at the start of the
thirty-minute special. “You're going to be closer to pro football than
you've ever been before.” And during a season in which pro football was
popping up all over, Life magazine's December 5 issue featured a
gatefold cover with a dramatic, ground-level shot of a football perched
on a tee, an instant before Steve Myhra kicked off to begin a game at
Memorial Stadium in Baltimore. The cover blurb read: “The Great
Spectator Sport: Pro Football Breaks Away for Big Gains.”
For his part, Rozelle was working on his numerous relationships in

television and advertising, as well as his personal connection to the
nation's largest and most influential sports magazine. Rozelle's friend Tex
Maule introduced the commissioner to Sports Illustrated’s new managing
editor, André Laguerre, the former press attaché to Charles de Gaulle
during World War II, and a late but staunch convert to the world of pro
football.

In Rozelle's words, Sports Illustrated “treated pro football like it had
never been treated before.” The magazine, after a decade of losses,
began finding itself in the early ’60s, and pro football was a key element
of its content change from upscale sporting magazine to a news
magazine devoted largely to spectator sports. In a confidential 1962
letter to Time Inc. founder Henry Luce, La-guerre wrote, “I'm developing
a strong hunch that pro football is our sport. We have grown with it, and
each of us is a phenomenon of the times. We gave it more coverage last
year, but I plan to extend it this fall. It seems that our reader identifies
himself more with this sport than golf or fishing. College football is too
diffuse and regionalized. Baseball in some quarters is considered oldfashioned or slightly non-U. Horse racing and winter sports have less
broad appeal.”
It would be difficult to pinpoint any single development that caused
the sport's increased profile, and some had been in motion prior to
Rozelle's arrival. But the confluence of elements—the Giants’ stature, the
’58 title game, the Packers’ mystique, Rozelle's vision and Kensil's
implementation of it, the sport's appeal to Madison Avenue—all
contributed to pro football moving toward center stage of American
sports.
There was also a sense, even in politics, that the cultural moment was
right for football. Eisenhower had been a football player as well as a fan,
but was better known for his love of golf. The two candidates in the
1960 presidential campaign brought their pro football fanaticism to a
new level. Richard Nixon, who'd played football at Whittier College,
took advantage of every opportunity to participate in football functions
as vice president. In 1957, he traveled to Green Bay for the opening of
Lambeau Field and two years later was in New York to present the

Heisman Trophy to Billy Cannon. He was so captivated by the NFL title
game in 1958, he wrote a note to Weeb Ewbank, telling him that he, like
Ewbank, had worked as a child as a delivery boy for his father's grocery
store. A year later, before the 1959 title game, Nixon visited the Giants’
locker room prior to the game, and shook hands with each player.“Some
people were getting their ankles taped, some people had on just their
gray T-shirts, very few had on numbers the way you could identify
them,” said Pat Summerall. “Nixon went to every person in our locker
room, all of the active players, and had a conversation with everyone.
Knew what kind of a year they had, if they had statistics, he knew the
statistics. There was no way, unless he was a very devout fan, that he
could have known all that. I thought that is one of the most amazing
things I have ever seen in my life. We're getting ready for the
championship game, and here's the vice president, going to every locker,
knowing everybody's name.”
John F. Kennedy and his brothers had long been associated with
football, and the family's bruising games of touch football on the lawn of
Joseph Kennedy's Hyannis Port estate were the stuff of both family and
political leg-end—also a way to let off steam on the afternoon of the
1960 general election, as the family waited for returns to start coming
in. “I think they were both always attracted to athletes,” said Robert
Kennedy's wife, Ethel Kennedy, of Jack and Bobby. “They had mixed it
up, and they didn't complain.” The family was close to Colts owner
Carroll Rosenbloom, and distant relatives of the Rams’ Dan Reeves,
whose wife's sister was married to Ethel Kennedy's brother George
Skakel. Kennedy had met Lombardi during the 1960 primary, and
invited him to the inauguration in Washington (though Lombardi had to
decline because of the annual league meetings).
The president had retired from touch football by the time he was
elected, but Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy—who'd been an
intense, if undersized, end on the Harvard varsity in 1947—was still a
regular, invariably playing quarterback. RFK kept a football in his office
at the Justice Department, and would often toss it during meetings with
close friends, like Justice Byron “Whizzer” White, a college star at
Colorado, or civil rights staffer Burke Marshall during meetings.
Jack and Bobby often built their Sundays around watching the Colts or

Redskins play, and had started to take a particular interest in Lombardi's
progress in Green Bay. The Kennedys certainly had much in common
with Lombardi in both religion and politics, but it was more than that.
“I'm sure there were a lot of other Catholic Democrats around,” said
Ethel Kennedy. “Jack and Bobby clearly were drawn to Vince because of
his character and his handling of the men. And I think it was his spirit.”
As Bert Bell had indicated when the new league announced its presence,
there were plenty of players out there. The NFL's tight rosters and
reluctance to give a job to all but the most proven and expensive of
rookies meant that there were hundreds of players around the country
with the talent to make an NFL roster yet unable to find the right
opportunity. George Blanda, who'd retired after growing tired of
alternating as a starting quarterback for the Bears, signed up with
Houston. Don Maynard, a gifted wide receiver who'd hurt himself with
fumbles while playing with the Giants in 1958, signed with the New
York Titans, where he got a chance to shine. Jack Kemp, last cut by San
Francisco, and Sid Gillman, fired by the Rams, both landed in Los
Angeles, with Barron Hilton's Los Angeles Chargers, where both would
flourish in the more wide-open offensive environment of the new league.
While the AFL was following the NFL rulebook to the letter, with the
exception of the two-point conversion, there was a concerted effort to
add to the passing game. For its official ball, the league used the
Spalding JV-5, one fourth of an inch longer, and one fourth of an inch
slimmer than the NFL Wilson model.
For Gillman, the Chargers job was a second chance at the pro level.
With the Rams, he'd grown overly sensitive to criticism from his team,
the fans, and the press. With the Chargers, he was free to pursue his
innovative tendencies and experiment with the passing game in a way
he'd never dared in the NFL (where over five seasons he ran the ball
nearly 55 percent of the time). Through the inventive passing game
conceived by Gillman, the Chargers took to the air more than half the
time in each of his first three seasons in the league.
Though the Chargers proved an exciting aesthetic success, they were
virtually ignored in Los Angeles, drawing 11,545 for their last regular

season game in the 100,000-seat Coliseum. A month after the season
ended, the team agreed to move to San Diego, provided the city would
add an upper deck to Balboa Stadium, increasing the capacity to 34,000.
Grave circumstances existed throughout the league, with Denver,
Oakland, and the New York Titans struggling to make payroll through
the first season. The Broncos’ entire operation was threadbare, from
their drab brown-and-yellow uniforms (with notorious brown vertical
stripes on their socks) to the team's offices, housed in a military-styled
Quonset hut thirty yards from their practice field. The Raiders were
forced to play their games across the bay in San Francisco, the first four
at the aging Kezar Stadium and the last three at Candlestick Park; their
home attendance averaged just 9,611 in their first season.
Bud Adams's Houston Oilers had the AFL's best team in 1960, with an
offense anchored by Bears castoff George Blanda, who came out of
retirement to lead the new league in passing, and Billy Cannon, who
proved his worth in both football ability and box office sway. In the
1960 championship game, played at Houston's Jeppesen Stadium, the
Oilers won a hard-fought game (which included 3 ejections), 24–16.
But even if the level of competition was not up to that of the NFL, and
the attendance was minor league by comparison (NFL games averaged
40,106 in paid attendance, while the AFL's announced average was
16,538, though even that modest figure was highly suspect), NFL teams
couldn't afford to ignore the new league. The courts struck down the
NFL's early signings, with the Rams losing Cannon to Houston, and the
Lions losing Johnny Robinson to Dallas. The Colts, after back-to-back
titles in 1958 and 1959, assumed they'd have little problem signing their
top draft choices. But by the time Don Kellett and Weeb Ewbank got
serious, they'd lost four of their first five choices to the AFL, including
number one pick Ron Mix, who would go on to a Hall of Fame career. It
was one of the factors that led to Ewbank's firing at the end of the 1962
season.
Because the Rams’ and Giants’ organizations were so well entrenched,
the only meaningful head-to-head battle for the loyalty of a city occurred
in Dallas, whose sports fans greeted the beginning of the 1960 football

season as though they were enjoying a ringside seat at a heavyweight
bout, which in essence they were. The city of 700,000 was the second
smallest in the NFL, larger than only Green Bay. Eight years after the
low-rent Texans washed out in half a season, Dallas was getting not one
but two new pro football teams. Both leagues viewed the city as a crucial
foothold in the larger war. And the club's respective owners were from
two of the richest, most celebrated oil baron families in the state. It
seemed impossible that both could survive, and certain that someone's
reputation would suffer greatly.
Carrying a season ticket order book wherever he went, Lamar Hunt set
about Dallas, spreading the word about the city's AFL entry, the Texans.
His plan was designed to evoke both excitement (the Texans called
themselves “Football's ZING Team”) and class (charging a dime more per
ticket than the Cowboys, at Hunt's insistence). For kids, Hunt
inaugurated the Texans’“Hud-dle Club,” which for $1 gave a child a
team T-shirt and free admission to all the games.“The Texans tried
everything to get fans out to their games,” wrote John Eisenberg in the
fan's memoir Cotton Bowl Days. “They put certificates good for free
tickets in balloons set loose over the city. They gave away tickets in
packages of corn chips. They gave away tickets to drivers who had their
windshields washed at Sinclair gas stations.” Hunt also hired a few
dozen young, attractive teachers to sell tickets, offering each a loaner
convertible, with the woman selling the most getting to keep her car.
The winner, a comely blonde named Norma Knoble, eventually married
Hunt.
On Sunday, October 2, 1960, the Texans drew 37,500 to their game
with the New York Titans. It was Barber Day, at the Cotton Bowl, with
everyone wearing barber smocks given free admission. (“What men
control the largest captive audiences of men in Dallas?” reasoned Hunt.
“The barbers.”) Also in the crowd were beneficiaries of the Texas Teen
Salute, high school students who got in free when they showed a ticket
stub from a high school game played two nights earlier, the same Friday
night that the Cowboys were in the Cotton Bowl, drawing 18,500.
Meanwhile, Cowboys fans were impatient. When western star Roy
Rogers and his wife, Dale Evans, rode around the field in a convertible at
halftime of the Cowboys’ home opener, they were pelted with programs,

paper cups, and ice cubes from fans who were already upset with the
home team. “I'm surprised Lamar didn't have a day where ice throwers
at our games got in free to see the Texans,” said Schramm, who for the
rest of his life would resent Hunt for his riches, his outwardly cool
demeanor, and the fact that the presence of the AFL club further
complicated Schramm's already daunting job of franchise building.

The Cowboys were for all intents the NFL's first true expansion team.
The league had added clubs before, but since it stabilized into its twodivision format in 1933, all the franchises added had either previously
existed in another league or were a combination of established teams
with defunct ones. The Cowboys were created out of thin air. Clint
Murchison paid a nominal $50,000 for the rights to the franchise, and
$550,000 for the thirty-six players, that he drafted from the other twelve
teams.
Behind diminutive quarterback Eddie LeBaron, Dallas struggled to an
0-11-1 record in its first season. Meanwhile, the 8-6 Texans had the
league's Rookie of the Year and Most Valuable Player, halfback Abner
Haynes, who'd gone to college at North Texas State in Denton. “I was a
big Texan fan, and so were all of my friends,” said Walt Garrison, then a
high school star in Lewisville, later a running back with the Cowboys.
“We didn't go to any Cowboy games. The Texans had Abner Haynes,
who was a local guy, and they had a winning team even though they
played in the AFL. Dallas fans don't care what league you play in as long
as you win.”
When a reporter asked Clint Murchison if the Cowboys were hurt by
the Texans’ underdog status, the owner was taken aback. “I'll be
damned,” he said. “You're the first person who I ever heard call a Hunt
an underdog.”
Partly because of the opportunities offered by the AFL, pro football in
the ’60s began to bear the fruits of fifteen years of fitful racial progress.
By the end of the ’50s, there was a sense throughout pro football that
things were starting to change. While racism was still common, it was
becoming less overt.
The unique problems faced by football teams in the South were a
further index of what the country had—and hadn't—accomplished in

race relations. In 1946, the Browns had left Marion Motley and Bill
Willis behind when they visited the Miami Seahawks, since Florida state
law prohibited integrated sports. When the Cleveland Browns returned
to Miami for the 1961 Playoff Bowl, the consolation game for the
runners-up in each conference, Paul Brown brought his entire team. But
he was greeted by a hotel manager who informed him that the club's
black players would have to stay elsewhere.
“No, our team stays together,” said Brown firmly.
After a heated exchange, the manager stood his ground.
“I'll tell you what then,” said Brown. “We'll just get back on the plane
and go back home.”
The hotel capitulated, a crisis was averted, and the Browns integrated
Miami hotels on that evening.
But in every city, it seemed, there was another fight. Segregation in
Dallas had become a national sports story at the 1957 Cotton Bowl,
when the lack of any integrated hotels forced Jim Brown to be separated
from his Syracuse teammates. In 1959, even before the Cowboys
franchise had been officially recognized, Tex Schramm met with the
powerful Dallas Citizens Council, the de facto city planners who
controlled everything from zoning to racial policies. At the time, the
Dallas school system was completely segregated, as were its residences,
restaurants, hotels, and even city buses, where blacks were still made to
ride in the back. Schramm argued that he could not hope to have a
successful pro football team in Dallas if the city persisted in segregating
its hotels. The Schramm petition brought the case to a head and
integration to at least one of Dallas's major hotels; the Ramada Inn next
to Dallas Love Field agreed to integrate, provided it wouldn't be
blackballed by the Citizens Council and other hotels.
On the field, there was less room for segregation than ever before.
During his first training camp with the Packers in 1959, Lombardi
confronted his team about racism. “If I ever hear nigger or dago or kike
or anything like that around here, regardless of who you are, you're
through with me,”he said.“You can't play for me if you have any kind of
prejudice.” Packers defensive back Willie Wood would call Lombardi
“perhaps the fairest person I ever met.” And his simultaneous

commitment to and bullying of the players later prompted the lineman
Henry Jordan's famous line, “He treats every man the same—he treats us
all like dogs.”
Of all the instances of racism, the most embarrassing one was in the
nation's capital. By the beginning of the 1961 season, there were eightythree blacks on the NFL's fourteen clubs—or, to be more precise, eightythree on thirteen clubs, since the Washington Redskins, the selfprofessed Team of the South, which still played “Dixie” before all its
home games, had abided by owner George Preston Marshall's edict not
to use black players.
Even among Marshall's defenders, the best that could be said about
him was that he was an opportunist rather than a racist, and that he kept
his club segregated to avoid alienating the wide network of fans in the
Deep South, where the Redskins barnstormed during the exhibition
season, and broadcast their games during the regular season. The allwhite Redskins were obviously at a competitive disadvantage due to the
policy (the team suffered through a 1-12-1 record in 1961), but
Marshall's vow—“We'll start signing Negroes when the Harlem
Globetrotters start signing whites”—seemed steadfast in the face of
public opinion.
Few were more vigilant or persistent in their critique of the blustery
Marshall than the Washington Post’s sports columnist Shirley Povich, who
brought that criticism to a kind of apex in his account of a RedskinsBrowns game in 1960:
For 18 minutes the Redskins were enjoying equal rights with the Cleveland

Browns yesterday, in the sense that there was no score in the contest. Then it
suddenly became unequal in favor of the Browns, who brought along Jim
Brown, their rugged colored fullback from Syracuse. From 25 yards out,

Brown was served the ball by Milt Plum on a pitch-out and he integrated the
Redskins’ goal line with more than deliberate speed, perhaps exceeding the
famous Supreme Court decree. Brown fled the 25 yards like a man in an

uncommon hurry and the Redskins’ goal line, at least, became interracial.

By that fall, Marshall's stubbornness had become a public
embarrassment. The means for intervention first occurred to Kennedy's
new secretary of the interior, Stewart Udall. The city's new D.C. Stadium,

where the Redskins would begin play in 1961, was built on federal land,
as part of the National Capital Parks System, which as with all
government buildings had clear rules forbidding discrimination in
hiring. After checking first with Robert Kennedy to receive clearance
from the administration to press the issue (“Go get him!” RFK told Udall.
“Make him do it!”), Udall called a press conference in the spring,
announcing that he had sent a warning letter to Marshall, advising the
owner that the government was aware of the Redskins’ reputation for
practicing discrimination and to be aware of “the implications of this
new regulation—and our view of its import.” After a couple months of
bluster from Marshall, during which Rozelle visited Washington for some
private prodding, the owner finally capitulated, negotiating a
compromise in late August that would allow the Redskins to play in D.C.
Stadium in 1961, with the agreement that the team would be integrated
by the beginning of the 1962 season. It was a significant victory for the
league, an important symbolic one for the administration, and another
example in the growing tendency for the public to view the world of
sports as a microcosm of the society at large.
As Vince Lombardi's star was rising, Paul Brown was struggling in
Cleveland. The beginning of the new decade found the Cleveland
Browns, the dominant team of the ’50s, contending with the frustration
of being merely good. It was a particularly rough adjustment for Paul
Brown.
The 1961 season featured Brown's first coaching outing against
Lombardi, with Green Bay hammering Cleveland, 49–17, the worst
defeat Paul Brown had ever suffered in front of a home crowd. Later in
the season, in a crucial showdown against the Giants, the Browns were
again outplayed in front of their home fans, 37–21. Players who'd been
loath to criticize Brown in the past became more outspoken. “It's not just
Sam Huff, but the whole Giant defensive unit is excellent,” said Jim
Brown after the 1961 season. “Plus the fact that their scouting of Paul
Brown's system is so good that they often know what he's going to run
even before Brown does himself.”
Paul Brown was still Paul Brown. His contribution to the sport was
unquestioned. His attention to detail and fundamentals hadn't noticeably
wavered. But something ineffable in his relationship with his team had.

It was not merely that the Browns weren't winning the championship
every year. It was that the teaching atmosphere, without Collier and
Ewbank, seemed less pronounced, more rote. In the absence of the
respect he'd earlier been accorded, a kind of cynicism set in among the
team. The Browns still gave players IQ tests at the beginning of the year,
but cheating had become widespread. Some players had even taken to
imitating PB's all-purpose, finger-wagging sign-off, delivered in an
imperious tone, “Just so you know …”
What virtually all those who played for Brown during those years
agree upon is that Brown was frustrated by his inability to get his most
talented player, Jim Brown, to behave in the way he wanted him to. It
had been an axiom of Paul Brown's philosophy that he treated all players
the same. But in Jim Brown, he would find an athlete who would not be
intimidated.
When halfback Bobby Mitchell came to the Browns as a rookie from
Illinois in 1958, Paul Brown had him room with Jim Brown. The two
men hit it off, but at times Mitchell felt like a stand-in, incurring the
wrath that Paul Brown wanted to direct at his star running back, but
didn't dare to. On more than one road trip, Mitchell would beseech the
slow-to-rise Brown to hurry to make the team bus on time. When the
two men arrived, whether a minute late or a minute early, the rest of the
team was waiting. “He'd come up to us,” said Mitchell,“and he'd walk
right up in front of me—he wouldn't walk up in front of Jim—and he'd
go off on me.‘We don't allow anyone, not one person on this team, to be
late.’ And Jim's standing there with his arms crossed, ’cause Jim knew he
was talking to him. But he wasn't in Jim's face, you see my point?”
“Bobby had to go through it,” agreed Jim Brown. “Paul Brown would
relate messages sideways and Bobby was the guy because Bobby and I
were always close. See, I'm not the kind of person you can holler at. You
gotta explain to me what you want, and I'll try to deliver that. But I'm
not gonna be hollered at. That's just not who I am. So Paul wasn't gonna
be able to holler or say certain things to me. And then the whole
concept, that you treat everybody equal, starts to fall apart. How the hell
you gonna do that? It doesn't work, ’cause we're not all picking tobacco
and making 30 cents an hour.”

In 1961, the Browns were sold for the then record sum of $4.1 million.
The new owner was a sly, wisecracking New York advertising executive
named Art Modell, a longtime Giants season-ticket holder who was
emblematic of a new breed of fan, drawn to the action of the sport as
well as the collegiality of the social scene that sprung around it.
Modell met with the Maras and some other owners. He eventually put
together an ownership group, and made his case to Rozelle. “I gave him
my financial statement—which was a load of shit,” said Modell. On
January 25, 1961, staking virtually all of his holdings and leveraging
himself severely, Modell bought the Browns.
One of the attractions of the team was the mystique and mastery of
Paul Brown. Yet Modell was disappointed to realize, very early on—“I
would say about twelve hours after the check cleared”—that he would
not be welcomed by the coach. Brown met Modell's wisecracks with
silence, and bridled at the owner's constant presence. Every morning
during the regular season, he'd show up at the Browns’ offices, at 7:30,
and listen in on film study and chalk talks. At the Browns’ offices, he
took the large office that had previously belonged to Brown, which
embittered the coach further.
Early in the 1961 season, Modell came into the locker room prior to a
game. “Paul called the team together,” he recalled. “I sat on a duffel bag
in the back of the room as he told the players, ‘Play hard … no
mistakes…. Okay, let's go.’ The players filed out and then Paul called me
over and said,‘I'd appreciate it if you never came in here again. This is
private, between myself and the players. You don't belong here and can't
come back.’ That hurt me. I didn't think it was necessary for him to talk
to me that way.”
The situation worsened later in the year. After George Preston
Marshall finally consented to integrating his club, the Redskins—to
much fanfare— drafted Ernie Davis with the first selection in the 1962
NFL draft, held in November 1961. He knew, though, that Davis would
be tough to sign, since the Buffalo Bills had selected him in the AFL
draft. Just days after the draft, Marshall dealt Davis to Cleveland for
Bobby Mitchell and Cleveland's first-round pick, running back Leroy
Jackson. Brown, who'd grown impatient with Mitchell's tendency to
fumble on inside runs, had long coveted Davis. It was Paul Brown who

dealt with Marshall; Modell didn't know anything about it until he got a
call from the Redskins owner.
“What do you think of our trade?” Marshall asked.
“George, what trade?” said Modell.
“Mitchell and your No. 1 pick for our No. 1 pick.”

There was silence on the line, and then Marshall said, “Aren't you
running that franchise?”
Modell, still reeling, stammered out a response before Marshall cut
him off. “Don't ever let that happen again,” he said. “You are the owner.
You own the franchise. It's yours.”
Had Davis been able to play that season, 1962 might have been a very
different campaign for the Browns. But during a routine training camp
physical, team doctors discovered he was dying of leukemia. In the midst
of their real sorrow, Modell and Paul Brown argued over whether Davis
should be allowed to suit up for a token exhibition game appearance,
and their communication, already poor, grew nonexistent.
In Washington, the arrival of the brilliant Mitchell brought a happy
ending to the Redskins’ integration saga, allowing Marshall to fulfill his
promise to integrate the team by 1962. It was not a comfortable season
for Mitchell, who was singled out for abuse by many in the stands and
the city. There were other indignities; at the team's preseason kickoff
dinner, Marshall implored Mitchell to sing along to the Redskins Band's
performance of “Dixie.”
“I'm sorry Mr. Marshall,” Mitchell dryly replied, “I don't know the
words.” Mitchell held up majestically, and played even better, eventually
fashioning a Hall of Fame career as a flanker (and later becoming one of
the first blacks to serve a consequential position in an NFL team's front
office).
Despite the loss of Mitchell and the devastating illness of Davis, the
Browns entered the 1962 exhibition campaign with high hopes.
Furthering the idea that a renaissance was imminent was the return of
Blanton Collier, who accepted his old assistant's job with the Browns
after being fired at Kentucky. Brown said he'd let his new starting
quarterback, Jim Ninowski, call some of the plays himself. Many players

were comforted by the placating influence of Collier, who had convinced
Brown to allow quarterbacks to call audibles at the line of scrimmage.
But Collier himself could see that something had changed. Though he
hailed Collier upon his return, Brown never gave his old friend an office,
leaving him to work out of meeting rooms and at spare desks. And the
innovations installed during training camp were soon scrapped. Brown
vacillated between Ninowski and Frank Ryan at quarterback, and Jim
Brown failed to lead the league in rushing for the first, and only, time in
his career. The Browns, unable to win more than two games in a row,
were eliminated early, and after yet another loss to the Giants, 17–13, in
the next-to-last game of the season, Paul Brown went into a deep funk.
The team returned to Cleveland for a short week of practice before
flying to San Francisco for the Saturday season finale. The last practice,
on a Friday at League Park, found Brown running the team through its
paces in the midst of a snowstorm. “Instead of being on the field with us,
Paul sat in his car, about twenty yards behind the offense,” recalled Lin
Houston. “The quarterback would go to Paul's car after every play, and
Paul would roll down the window and give him the play. The players
were all freezing, and Paul was in his warm car.”
Two days later, sitting in the visiting owner's box at Kezar Stadium
during the last game of the year, a listless 13–10 win over the 49ers, a
miserable Modell turned to team business manager Harold Sauerbrei,
who'd covered the Browns for the Plain Dealer through 1954, and then
joined the team as public relations director, before becoming business
manager in 1960.
“Harold, I need your advice,” said Modell.“What should I do?”
Sauerbrei had long been a Paul Brown loyalist, but he'd seen the same
things Modell had seen: a standoffish, increasingly alienated coach, and
a broad feeling of discontent in the locker room.
“Make a change,” said Sauerbrei.
Modell fretted over the decision for nearly a month. On January 16,
1963, Modell summoned Paul Brown to his office.
“Paul, sit down please,” said Modell. Brown, perturbed, still unclear
about the reason for the meeting, sat down impatiently. “Paul,” Modell
continued. “I'm going to make a change. I'm going to go in a different

direction. I hope you understand. I think we have to part company. I'm
going to ask you to step down as coach and general manager, and you
are to be reassigned.”
Brown's face was blank. Then his eyes narrowed. He said nothing,
simply got up and marched out of Modell's office, before Modell could
explain his reasons. Brown called his son, Mike, away on military duty,
and, voice quavering, gave him the news. “He's taken my team away
from me,” he said.
The firing illustrated the fleeting, fluid nature of football superiority.
Paul Brown's teams had traveled to the championship game in eleven of
the first twelve seasons he coached, winning seven titles. Though
Cleveland posted a 39-22-3 record in Brown's last five years in
Cleveland, he couldn't get the team back to the title game. The rest of
the league caught up, and the decisive edge Brown had for so long
enjoyed had vanished.
A day after firing Brown, Modell offered the job to Blanton Collier.
Collier said he'd have to consult with two people before accepting: his
wife, Forman, and Paul Brown.
Collier called Brown on the phone and explained that he'd been
offered the job. His friend was terse, but encouraging. “You have to take
it, Blanton,” Brown said. “You owe it to your family.” With that, and
Forman's blessing, Collier decided he would accept the job.
But soon after, Collier received a desperate call from Mike Brown,
Paul's son, who pleaded with him not to accept the job, because his
father—despite what he'd said—would take it personally. And indeed he
did. Brown never forgave Collier, never again regarded him as a friend.
“I speak to Blanton,” Brown explained years later. “I don't talk to him.”
Collier, in his press conference, credited Brown for his extraordinary
influence, and was injured by the ensuing rift for the rest of his life.
Paul Brown, for his part, showed more pain and vulnerability than
ever before. Even when he finally spoke to the press, more than a week
after the firing, he seemed disconsolate. “Outside of my family,” he said,
“what else except football have I known in my life?”
To a great extent, Pete Rozelle's early years as commissioner would be
highlighted by his fulfillment of the quest that had eluded Bert Bell, the

realization of a package television deal that would put the NFL
exclusively on one network, and bring each team an equal share of
television revenues. This became harder in the new decade, when the
Baltimore Colts, making $600,000 per year from NBC, were earning
nearly ten times as much from TV as some teams in the league, and CBS
was threatening to drop contracts altogether with teams in several
smaller markets.
By 1960, CBS held contracts for nine of the twelve NFL teams, each
individually negotiated, ranging from a high of $175,000 for the New
York Giants down to $75,000 for the Green Bay Packers. But NBC had
struck a novel deal with the Colts and Steelers, taking the rights to the
two teams and broadcasting one national game a week. The Colts, fresh
off their back-to-back championships, were the most appealing team in
the league. And broadcasting just one national game a week significantly
reduced expenses. CBS, meanwhile, was all over the country, paying the
production costs of five crews on a typical football Sunday, so as to be
able to broadcast each team's game back to its own home market. The
Browns had their own far-flung independent network, sponsored by
Carling Beer, which stretched from Texas to the East Coast, and
competed with CBS in numerous markets, along with ABC's broadcast of
the AFL game of the week.
In some cities, two or three NFL games were broadcast on Sunday,
often beginning at identical times. This diluted the audience and
frustrated advertisers and the network alike. If the situation persisted,
MacPhail told Rozelle, CBS would drop smaller markets, because
without the promise of an exclusive broadcast, the rights fees paid to
those clubs couldn't be justified.
MacPhail had made an informal presentation to the league owners in
1960, offering to pay $3 million a year for exclusive rights to the
league's regular season broadcasts, to be divided by the NFL in any way
it saw fit. The challenge for Rozelle was to convince teams like
Cleveland, Pittsburgh, and Baltimore, all earning more money from
other networks, that the league would be better off splitting the money
equally among all the teams, a move certain to cost some clubs money in
the short run.
Debates over the proposed plan had been simmering for years, with

small-and big-market clubs hewing to predictable stances. At the hotel
bar at the Kenilworth in 1960, Dan Rooney and Dan Reeves wound up in
an unusually spirited exchange over the question.
“There's a couple of different ways we can do this,” allowed Reeves.
“There's only one way we can do it,” Rooney interrupted, “and that's
to divide the money equally.”
“That's not going to happen.”

“Then there's not going to be any television in this league.”
Reeves was nonplussed. “How can you say that, Dan? What would you
do about it?”
“Well, when you come to Pittsburgh, there aren't going to be any Los
Angeles Rams games going to L.A.,” said Rooney. “We have every right
in the world to do this.”
“Then you won't get any money,” said Reeves.
“Then neither will you.”
During the course of the conversation, Reeves offered numerous
variations, some similar to the Veeck and Rickey concepts, another in
which all the teams started out with what they'd made the previous
season, then divided all additional monies that came in a package deal.
By 1961, Reeves had reluctantly come around, partially at the behest of
Rozelle.
A year later, at the 1961 annual meetings, held at the Warwick Hotel
in New York, Rozelle began by delivering the commissioner's annual
report, in which he noted, “Much of the past year has been spent in
developing a television plan for the future. The NFL has been credited
with harnessing television and using it to greater advantage than any
other sports activity. This position, however, will be lost without
planning for the future.”
Two days of extensive lobbying, with the assistance of Lombardi
(trying to sway the Mara brothers with the Giants, along with other
small-market clubs), led Rozelle to the brink of approval. The Giants had
been extremely reluctant to join in the plan, especially the flinty
Wellington Mara, until his brother, Jack, persuaded him. At the Friday
meeting, it was Wellington Mara who said, “We should all share, I guess.

Or we're going to lose some of the smaller teams down the line, and
we've all stuck together.”
After much debate, the motion passed on January 27, 1961, one day
after the one-year anniversary of Rozelle's election. It allowed the
commissioner to negotiate a TV contract on behalf of all the league's
members, maintained the home blackout policy, and stipulated every
road game each team played would be broadcast back to its own home
market.
“The big-city people—Halas, Reeves, the Maras—went along,” said
Rozelle later. “If Green Bay lost its television money, they wouldn't have
a balanced league. It was an altruistic decision on their part.”
Nearly as soon as Rozelle struck the deal, he saw it invalidated. The
agreement, signed with CBS in April, was rejected as a violation of
antitrust law two months later by U.S. District Court Judge Allan K.
Grim. A dejected Rozelle returned to New York by train, and when he
greeted his daughter, Anne, at the Rozelles’ Sutton Place apartment,
burst into tears.
The curious reasoning of Grim's decision was that, in his 1953 ruling
(allowing the league to black out telecasts of home games in home
markets), he had not expressly allowed a package deal, and thus couldn't
allow such an arrangement after the fact.
The league's next move was to try to push for congressional approval.
The deal was aided by Carroll Rosenbloom's close relationship with the
Kennedy family, as well as Rozelle's friendship with Kennedy press
secretary and fellow University of San Francisco alum Pierre Salinger.
After a round of intense politicking—and a promise not to play or
televise games on Saturday during the college football season to placate
the NCAA— the league successfully pushed through a congressional
action that provided antitrust exemption for joint TV deals. On the eve
of the signing, the president held a small reception for the sponsors of
the bill at the White House. Rozelle, forever gracious and inclusive,
spent much of the event talking earnestly to Kennedy's personal
secretary, the matronly, fifty-two-year-old Evelyn Norton Lincoln. At one
point, a bemused JFK walked over to Salinger and asked, “Pierre, is the
commissioner hitting on my secretary?” Salinger explained that it was

“just like Pete” to engage the least important person in the room.
On September 30, 1961, Kennedy signed the Sports Broadcasting bill,
giving pro football an exemption from antitrust statutes. And it paid off
almost immediately. On January 10, 1962, CBS signed the first national
TV contract with the NFL, at the same terms that had been agreed to a
year earlier— $4,650,000 per season for two years.
In ensuing years, the policy of revenue sharing was viewed by many
critics as a monopolistic act of market control. Ron Powers, in his history
of television sports, Supertube, wrote that Rozelle “was in fact quietly
constructing a perfect model for socialism.” But the idea that a joint
television deal was inherently socialistic only made sense if one viewed a
sports league as purely a business enterprise, and this was to miss a good
part of the essence of competitive sports. “The whole thing was
equalizing the competition on the field,” said Rozelle. “The sharing of
income gave everyone the tools, the money, to compete equally. Now,
some don't. But management and coaching and so forth being the big
difference—and players—they had the opportunity, at least, to compete
equally.”
Much bluster would come in later years about owners as selfless or
devoted to the good of the whole. But in this single case, the decision to
share revenue equally—echoing the one that the AFL made at the behest
of Hunt, and the one that the world of baseball ignored despite the
entreaties of Veeck and Rickey—would become a model for American
sports that would allow the games to rise from the Darwinian business
model in which each club struggled for the last dollar, toward a system
that made the primary competition the one on the field of play.
At heart, the NFL's decision to approve a joint TV contract, whatever
the intent, served to place a higher priority on an equality of opportunity
for all competitors than on maximizing the revenue of any individual
franchise. In short, pro football had established an important tenet about
which, forty years later, baseball owners were still bickering.
That the entire enterprise came to dominate America's living rooms on
fall weekends, changing the rhythm, tone, and nature of Sunday
afternoons across the country, was still a work in progress. It would be

years before professional football could plausibly boast of eclipsing
Major League Baseball in overall popularity. But with the historic
television deal, the last of the necessary elements was in place for the
coming gridiron coup, as well as the continued survival of the Packers
and other small-market teams.

In this, the efforts of Rozelle and Lombardi complemented one
another. Just as Rozelle helped the NFL by pushing through revenue
sharing, Lom-bardi's arrival in Green Bay added a dose of glamour to the
league's last quaint franchise and dramatically demonstrated the power
of the egalitarianism of revenue sharing. It wasn't just a concept. It was
how the sport ensured it was closer to operating as a pure meritocracy
than any other realm in American society. And it offered the irresistible
lure of how a Green Bay—with good personnel and superior coaching—
could rise up and smite the New Yorks of the world.
By the end of the 1962 season, the Packers beat the New York Giants
for their second straight world title. Paul Hornung, despite missing part
of the season with an injury, was becoming one of the best-known
athletes in sports, with lucrative endorsement deals from Zenith,
Jantzen, and Marlboro. And Lombardi had eclipsed Brown as the most
visible coach in pro football, appearing on the cover of Time magazine's
December 21, 1962, issue. The cover caption read “The Sport of the
’60s.”

10

The Czar

V

ince Lombardi sat in the chair, tie stiffly knotted about his neck, a
look of perplexed dismay creasing his face as he scanned the file
that Pete Rozelle had handed him. After reviewing the two-page
statement and its tersely phrased admissions—“I also bet on the regular
season games of the Packers and other teams in 1959, 1960 & 1961”—
Lombardi sighed deeply, closed the file and placed it back on Rozelle's
desk.
“Well, you have no choice,” the coach said. “You have to suspend
him.”
“I think I do,” said Rozelle, taking another drag on a cigarette, casting
a sympathetic glance across his desk.
“Well, then,” said Lombardi, “let's go get a drink.”
It was early April 1963, just months after Lombardi's Packers had won
their second straight NFL title. That night, Lombardi and Rozelle hit the
town, both seeking to dilute their burdens. Lombardi was morose over
evidence of betrayal by his favorite player and the consequence it might
have on the dynasty he was building; Rozelle was steeling himself for
the firestorm to come when he would announce the suspension of two of
the league's best-known players—1961 Most Valuable Player and
Packers Golden Boy Paul Hornung, and the Detroit Lions All-Pro
defensive tackle Alex Karras—and bring to an explosive conclusion his
methodical, comprehensive investigation of the most serious gambling
scandal in pro football since the Filchock-Hapes scandal of 1946.

The Hornung-Karras case was merely the centerpiece of Pete Rozelle's
remarkable 1963. He would enjoy greater power and notoriety in later
years, but the events that occurred over the fourteen-month period—
from December 1962 through January 1964—would largely define
Rozelle's leadership, and set in motion pro football's inexorable
ascendance. By the end of that period, he'd met the greatest challenges
the office had to offer, been hardened by the criticism that accompanied
it, and emerged as the unmistakable leader of pro football, a callow
“child czar” no more.
The chatter about different players associating with gamblers had been
building throughout the 1962 season, with numerous reports from the
ex-FBI agents on retainer in cities throughout the league. By early
January, the suspicions were a matter of public record, with the Bears’
George Halas commenting that some of the league's players were guilty
of “undesirable associations.” The New York Times ran a series of pieces
under headlines like “Hoodlums Linked to Detroit Lions” and “Inquiry
Widens in Pro Football.” There were no point-shaving charges, as
occurred with Filchock and Hapes in 1946, but instead vague
suggestions of associations between gamblers and stars. Pete Rozelle
knew, as had Bert Bell, that the suspicion could be as damaging as the
fact.
By January 9, 1963, Rozelle had publicly confirmed that the league
was beginning an investigation of unnamed players and, on that same
day, met Hor-nung at the Plaza Hotel in New York to ask about his
relations with suspected gamblers and whether he himself had gambled
on football. Hornung denied that he had, and agreed to submit to a lie
detector test. The next afternoon, Hornung reported to the office of John
P. Daly, one of the league's security men, where the test was conducted.
In a subsequent report to Rozelle, polygraph consultant Thomas J.
McShane said that, after Hornung denied having bet on any NFL games
or passing any information to bettors, McShane had “promptly advised
Mr. Hornung that his chart clearly indicated that he was purposely
withholding pertinent information, that he had lied on several critical
questions, including his betting on games, having bets placed through
others, furnishing information to others for betting purposes…. He was

reminded that he did not have to say anything, but it was strongly
suggested to him that it was in his best interests and the interests of
professional sports that he cooperate completely and furnish all the
information he could regarding the investigation at hand.”

With that, Hornung buckled, and confessed that he had placed a series
of bets, from the 1959 season through the 1962 preseason, with his
friend Barney Shapiro, the head of a California novelty company who
had once, in the ’50s, owned a small stake in a Las Vegas hotel and
casino. He'd also placed bets with another friend, and had shared
information with both men on the state of the Packers.
Though Shapiro was not a bookmaker, and although his bets were
placed legally in Las Vegas, Hornung was still in blatant violation of
Paragraph 11 of the standard player's contract, which declared that the
commissioner possessed broad powers “to fine, cancel the contract or
suspend indefinitely any player accepting bribes or fixing games, or
having knowledge of same,” but also any player “who bets on a game, or
who is guilty of any conduct detrimental to the welfare of the National
Football League or professional football.”
On January 16, 1963, NBC's The Huntley-Brinkley Report aired an
interview with Karras in which the burly, sardonic lineman admitted to
NBC reporter Ed Burk that he'd bet on games, and bet occasionally on
his own team. Rozelle had spoken to Karras two weeks earlier, but after
the news program aired that evening, he summoned Karras back to New
York immediately. Karras was in Rozelle's office at eleven o'clock the
next morning.
There was, by then, enough evidence to discipline both players. But
Rozelle pressed forward with his investigation for two more months—
even as the media was bubbling with speculation about the gravity of
the charges and criticism of Rozelle's own persistent lack of comment on
the investigation. One of the central principles of public relations,
instilled in Rozelle during his years with P. K. Macker and Co., was the
value of full disclosure: don't conceal, but never rush to comment if the
facts weren't clear. Nothing was more damaging to an organization's
credibility than to make a partial admission, then be forced to come
back later to confirm more charges. So Rozelle continued digging,
pursuing leads, reinterviewing the particulars, clarifying the league's

bylaws and the commissioner's powers therein. Only in April, after
exhausting all angles, was he satisfied that the matter had been
investigated thoroughly enough that there would be no further
damaging revelations.

On the morning of April 17, he called Hornung's home in Louisville.
Hornung's mother answered and said her son was away. “Is there
anything I can tell Paul?” she asked.
Rozelle choked up trying to answer her, but managed to say,“No,
ma'am. If you'll just have Paul call me.”
Later that afternoon, he spoke with both Hornung and Karras by
phone, informing each man that he would be suspended indefinitely, but
could apply for reinstatement in one year.
Bunkered in the league offices, Rozelle and Kensil had spent more
than two days hammering out the press release, an artfully constructed
eight-page document—released just hours after he'd notified the players
—which opened with the good news, offering a staunch defense of the
game's integrity:
There is no evidence that any NFL player has given less than his best in playing

any game.

There is no evidence that any player has ever bet against his own team.

There is no evidence that any NFL player has sold information to gamblers.

There is clear evidence that some NFL players knowingly carried on undesirable

associations which in some instances led to their betting on their own team to win
and/or other National Football League games.

Rozelle went on to announce that he'd suspended Hornung and Karras
“indefinitely” and doled out additional fines to several Lions players who
had bet on the 1962 NFL championship game, as well as coach George
Wilson.
Rozelle's public face was one of empathetic firmness. He spoke highly
of Hornung's honesty, never mentioning that the player had lied during
the initial polygraph examination (“When I told Hornung of the charges,
he admitted them,” said Rozelle). Hornung, for his part, seemed
genuinely contrite.“It was a carefree, thoughtless thing I did,” he told the
press. It certainly helped that Lombardi, while showing affection for his

favorite player, publicly backed the commissioner and affirmed the
justice of the punishment. “I am shocked and hurt,” Lombardi said.
“However, there was a definite violation of the player contract and
constitution and bylaws of this league in regard to gambling, which is
punishable by suspension. The commissioner had no alternative because,
if allowed to continue, it would lead to more serious consequences.”

Karras was much more critical, of both the suspension and the entire
investigation. “I haven't done anything to be ashamed of,” he said, “and
I'm not guilty of anything.” But he, too, eventually toed the line, giving
up his stake in a tavern deemed undesirable by the NFL.
The public and media response, while understandably mixed in Detroit
and Green Bay, was for the most part highly complimentary of Rozelle's
handling of the crisis. “Commissioner Rozelle became commissioner
yesterday,” wrote Doc Greene in the Detroit News. Jim Murray in the Los
Angeles Times recognized the commissioner's difficult position: “Rozelle
had to protect the game rather than the players. He had to show the
owners, the players—and the public—that pro football was a big boy
now, a public trust that the public could trust.”
And that, in a sense, was Rozelle's greatest accomplishment in the
investigation. By suspending two of the best-known players in the league
for what he himself described as an action of “no criminality,” Rozelle
lowered the threshold for punishable behavior and raised the bar for the
level of behavior the league could expect from its players. In so doing,
he raised the public level of confidence in the game itself.
About a week after the suspension, Rozelle received a handwritten
note from Hornung's mother, Loretta, thanking him for his handling of
the incident. “I know it was not an easy decision to make,” she wrote,
“and I, too, fully appreciate your responsibility to the League—it had to
come first.” He replied immediately, on April 30: “Words cannot express
my deep appreciation for the most thoughtful letter I received today and
just finished reading.”
The fallout from the Hornung and Karras suspensions was so great that
there was little discussion about the loose end that hadn't been tied up,
Rozelle's ongoing investigation into possible gambling on games by
Carroll Rosenbloom. Ultimately, there was to be no public sanction.

Instead, Rosen-bloom privately submitted to Rozelle a written oath that
he would no longer gamble on football. (Two different Colts employees
of the ’60s, though, said they witnessed him placing bets on his team
from the Colts’ offices later on in the decade.)

The last thing Rozelle did before closing the book on the Hornung and
Karras cases was to hire James Hamilton, former intelligence chief of the
Los Angeles police department, as the league's full-time head of security.
Hamilton would cultivate a series of contacts in each league city, and
would both report and follow up on rumors regarding player conduct.
Throughout the previous year, many of the league's biggest problems
had been resolved. In May of 1962, the NFL successfully defended itself
in U.S. district court in Baltimore against the $10 million civil suit
brought by the AFL. When the case was filed, Rozelle had retained the
Washington, D.C., firm of Coving-ton & Burling, among the nation's
premier litigators in antitrust law. The lead partner in the case was the
legendary Gerhard Gesell, among the giants of twentieth-century
antitrust litigation, whose knowledge of sports was limited. He was
abetted by a rising young lawyer named Hamilton Carothers, a wry,
acerbic weekend athlete who understood the structure of sports, and
who would become one of Rozelle's key advisers over the next twentyfive years.
In December 1962, with Dan Reeves still battling with his partners
over the direction of the Rams, Rozelle suggested the structure of a
sealed auction that would finally settle the impasse, and allow one side
to buy the other out. It ended happily for Rozelle, with his friend Reeves
submitting the highest bid and regaining sole operating control of the
team, at a total price of $7.1 million.
Writing after a league meeting late in 1962, the Los Angeles Herald
Examiner’s Bob Oates noted that, once again, “the old salts of the league
have marveled at the smoothness of the operation under the young
commissioner, Pete Rozelle…. The characteristics of all Rozelle
enterprises seem to be harmony and action, two things that are not
normally related.”
It would be years before anyone but Rozelle's closest friends
understood the pressure he was under during that span, but a fuller

appreciation of his performance during the time renders it all the more
remarkable.
While Rozelle's public persona was ascendant, his private life was
becoming increasingly troublesome. The workload, which he'd known
would be severe, proved nearly unrelenting. In the months after taking
the job in 1960, he was taking over the office, moving to Philadelphia,
then New York, and fighting the Billy Cannon suit; in the 1961 offseason it was tortured negotiations, within the league and on Capitol
Hill, to push the joint television package through; in 1962 it was the AFL
vs. NFL antitrust suit; in 1963 it was the gambling investigation.
In addition to that, Rozelle's presence was now desired, even
necessary, at dozens of social events a month. The shy Jane was miscast
as the wife of a public figure; she had never enjoyed the spotlight, and
her drinking, which friends had first noticed during Rozelle's tenure with
Ken Macker in the ’50s, had grown to troublesome proportions.
“In fairness, I think Pete was married to pro football more than he was
married to Jane,” said his friend John Lehman. The specter of marital
discord had grown so daunting by 1963 that Rozelle often found excuses
to stay late. “He said he didn't want to go home,” said one co-worker at
the league office. “So he'd stay out as long as possible and maybe when
he got home, she'd be asleep.”
When Tex Schramm and his wife, Marty, visited New York, they
frequently made dinner appointments with the Rozelles. “At the last
minute,” said Schramm, “something would always come up. ‘Jane's not
feeling well.’ ‘Jane can't make it.’ After a while we began to figure it
out.”
The year 1963 was a particularly taxing one for the Rozelle household.
Jane was hospitalized for a few days in January and June, and after
another setback in late September, she was admitted to another facility
for extensive treatment.
“If I can look at what my life was, from one to ten, she might have
been there one and a half percent of the time,” said Anne. “I mean, it
was really small. Really small. My dad always made every school event; I
don't know how he did that but he did. Then I went through a period

where I was struggling in school and I remember they said, ‘She can't tell
time.’ So he would literally clear his calendar for an entire weekend, and
work all weekend long on, ‘We're going to learn the time.’ ”
Rozelle compensated for Jane's increasing absences by frequently
bringing Anne along on road trips and letting her play in the NFL offices
when he went into work on Saturday mornings. In this instance,
Rozelle's omnicompetent secretary, Thelma Elkjer, played an even more
important role, often acting as a surrogate mother, taking the girl
shopping or to dinner. He stayed in many nights, coming home from
work and switching into a bathrobe, helping Anne with her homework
or eating dinner in front of the TV, reading newspapers and novels and
talking to MacPhail or Landry or, most frequently and at greatest length,
Kensil on the phone. It was not the most ideal of worlds, but those
closest to Rozelle never questioned the father's love for the daughter. At
a time when men routinely eschewed the obligations of parenting,
Rozelle was taking even more of it on himself.
The final straw for Rozelle came in a series of episodes in 1965, one in
which Jane threatened her own daughter and a teenage nanny with a
knife. Another afternoon, Thelma Elkjer patched through a call to
Rozelle from his wife, calling from a midtown bar, asking him to come
get her. When he went to pick up Jane, he found Anne sitting on the
barstool next to her.
“That convinced him that he had to get a divorce,” said friend Pete
Newell. “Anne was the light of his life.” In 1967, at a time when such a
thing was virtually unprecedented, Pete Rozelle was awarded custody of
his daughter.
In White Collar, his cultural history of the rising middle class, C.
Wright Mills observed that by the ’60s postwar America had become “a
great salesroom, an enormous file, an incorporated brain, and a new
universe of management and manipulation.” The sport that best
reflected that change was pro football, and the league that was best able
to create and capitalize on those changes was the NFL.
In essence, the NFL didn't merely sell a game, it created a full-force
public relations strategy to bring the game to America. The league's two
great marketing innovations came into being at approximately the same

period. Both were ideas presented by outsiders, then embraced and
honed to maximum advantage by Rozelle.
One of Rozelle's annual duties as commissioner was to sell the
filmmaking rights to the league's championship game. The resulting halfhour films looked like an extended version of the highlight reels shown
before movies in the earlier part of the century—press box views of big
plays, presented in chronological order, accompanied by marching band
music, and the cloying, alliterative voice-overs so common at the time.
Tel-Ra Productions, the small Philadelphia company that had retained
the rights to the NFL title game films for several years, was the leader in
the market. Tel-Ra also packaged several teams’ highlight films, the sort
of things shown at fraternity smokers and booster club meetings as a
vehicle for improving a club's season ticket sales.
Into the modest bidding in November 1962 came a brash, artful
Philadelphia huckster named Ed Sabol, a loud, vulgar, funny iconoclast
who'd spent twenty prosperous but unhappy years working for his
father-in-law's coat company. In 1956, at age forty, he cashed in his
holdings and retired.
One of the avocations he'd taken up over the years was using his
16mm camera to film his son Steve's football games, and by November
of 1962, Sabol had decided he wanted to get into the sports film
business. Knowing that the rights to the 1961 NFL title game had been
sold for $2,500, he came in with a sealed bid for $5,000 from his startup company Blair Motion Pictures, Inc., whose credits to that point
included a Caribbean vacation film, a documentary about the vain quest
of a whale harpooner, and a stop-action film of a Howard Johnson's
motel being constructed. After Rozelle opened the sealed bids, and
discovered that the high bidder, Blair Motion Pictures, had never filmed
a professional football game before, he called Sabol into his office for a
consultation. Sabol made a dramatic pitch, proposing to use eight
cameras instead of Tel-Ra's four, bring zoom lens and slow motion into
the equation to provide more intimacy, use more dramatic music and
more sharply defined narration. After two days to think about it, Rozelle
went ahead and awarded the contract to Sabol, telling him, “I just hope
that we get a film out of this.”
The 1962 championship game, played in frigid conditions at Yankee

Stadium, found the machine-like Packers, behind another superb
performance from Hornung, defeating the Giants, 16–7, to win their
second straight title.
The film about the game premiered for the press and Giants officials
six weeks later at Toots Shor's restaurant on West 52nd Street. Sabol's
film, titled Pro Football's Longest Day, opened with contrasting shots of
tiny Green Bay and majestic New York, and documentary-style vignettes
from Bart Starr, Vince Lombardi, and Frank Gifford. Then it cut to the
opening credits, with a bank of fourteen NFL team logos, disappearing
one at a time as drumbeats sounded off. At the end of the cadence, only
the Giants and Packers logos remained. These clashed over the NFL
shield in the middle of the screen and cut to a shot of a miniature
football stadium, inside of which stood two small bobble-head dolls, one
in a Packers uniform and one in a Giants uniform. Over Chris Schenkel's
clipped narration, written by Sabol himself, the frigid conditions became
all the more vivid. The Packers’ iconic Lombardi, pacing the sidelines in
his camel's hair coat, took on the aspect of a general leading his troops
into war. And the action that had unfolded too quickly to be fully
absorbed live revealed itself to be a carefully orchestrated series of troop
movements, captured in close-up and slow motion by Sabol's cameras.
After the screening, Rozelle came over to Sabol and told him it was
“the best football film I've ever seen.”
Sabol held on to the rights for the 1963 and 1964 championship
games and, after securing the 1964 film, he came to Rozelle with a bold
proposal. He suggested that the league bring Blair Motion Pictures inhouse, as a promotional vehicle. In addition to shooting the
championship game, Sabol could also assemble a staff that would
produce highlight videos for each team, at a much cheaper cost than
they were presently being charged by outside filmmakers, and help the
club find a sponsor for each. At the league meetings in the spring of
1965, Sabol made his pitch, asking for a one-time investment of $20,000
per team. On the recommendation of Rozelle, the owners voted to buy
Blair Motion Pictures and rename it NFL Films, putting Ed Sabol on the
NFL payroll at $30,000 per year. The endeavor took flight immediately,
and in 1965 many CBS affiliates, along with American Express, had
bought into a syndicated weekly feature, the NFL Game of the Week. NFL

Films began in 1965 to send two cameramen (one with a press-box-wide
view of each play, another from the field for close-ups) to every NFL
game. And so began the profligate documentation that would bring
about the self-mythologizing of pro football.

The idea of bringing NFL Films in-house was more plausible to owners
because of a project Rozelle had been working on since returning to the
Rams in 1957. The Rams’ partnership for licensing souvenirs, with Larry
Kent and Roy Rogers, Inc., was so successful that in 1959 Kent proposed
expanding it to the entire league, noting in a prospectus that pro football
offered “the most exciting potential for brand name licensing that exists
on the American scene.”
Bert Bell had liked the idea, and appointed a committee of Rozelle, the
Colts’ Carroll Rosenbloom, and the Bears’ George Halas. The limited
partnership of National Football League Enterprises was formally created
on October 1, 1959. The ambitious project put the use of all the teams’
logos and emblems under the Roy Rogers umbrella, and while the
partnership suffered a loss in its first full year, volume increased quickly,
and by 1962 NFL Enterprises was profitable. But both Kent and Rozelle
recognized that for the plan to really pay off, it would have to be
brought in-house, giving the league more creative control and a greater
share of the profits. In 1963, Rozelle convinced the league's owners to
found National Football League Properties, Inc., “a business arm of the
14 teams, individually and collectively, in such areas as youth sports
competitions, publishing, advertising and merchandising.” Where
previously the clubs had used several different manufacturers for their
team pennants, NFL Enterprises contracted with a single company, to
make pennants for all teams, assuring greater consistency, uniformity,
and quality.
“We wanted fans to think of the teams as equal,” explained Hamilton
Carothers, the attorney from Covington & Burling who'd grown close to
Rozelle during the AFL vs. NFL trial. “And we did not want a stand
selling pennants, one from the New York Giants, made of silk, and
another one, of the Pittsburgh Steelers, made of paper. If you could buy
fancy T-shirts from the New York Giants, but crap, junky T-shirts from
another team, that's no good—that hurts the league.”
The first catalogue included seat cushions and bobble-head dolls, team

logo baby bibs (“I'm a Little Colt”) and utility bags. In New York, Saks
Fifth Avenue included a “Giants Locker Room” window display during
the 1963 Christmas season, featuring a full range of Giants souvenirs and
a child-sized Giants uniform. In 1964, in cooperation with NFL
Properties, Ford sponsored the league's “Punt, Pass & Kick” promotion.
While the group's attempt to cater to girls—the NFL “Pom-Twirl and
Drill Competition”—was decidedly less successful, most of the ventures
were a hit. A year after bringing the entity in-house, the league realized
rights payments of over $100,000 in 1965.
Kent was the can-do president of NFL Properties and, just as crucially,
artist and graphic designer David Boss was hired as the design
consultant. Boss, who in the late ’50s had designed the Rams’ slick
yearbooks, had earlier been summoned by Rozelle to conceive a
recruiting brochure to be distributed to potential players, called The NFL
and You. By 1965, Boss began the Creative Services division of NFL
Properties, and provided design aid to licensees, clients, and the teams
themselves. In the years ahead, it would begin a series of remarkably
prolific and sophisticated print projects.
It would be a few more years before NFL Properties began to turn a
significant profit. But profits in either case were incidental; Rozelle
viewed both Properties and the separate entity of NFL Films as vehicles
to expand the prestige and profile of the league. And in this, he
succeeded spectacularly. In an increasingly fast-paced, commercialized
age, the league had found a way to set itself apart. Up until the ’60s,
sports had been something to do, something to read about, or something
to watch. With NFL Films, it became something to be experienced, and
with NFL Properties it became a kind of extended lifestyle choice. Pro
football wasn't just for Sundays anymore. The NFL press office increased
coverage of, and interest in, the league throughout the week. And the
ancillary divisions developed other ways for the game to be enjoyed: a
movie about football could be as entertaining as the game itself. And
those who chose to identify with a particular team could now pay for the
privilege, with handsome hats, T-shirts, and other souvenirs. Pro football
was escaping from its confines, and beginning to insinuate itself into the
larger realm of American popular culture.
The 1963 season kicked off with the dedication of the Pro Football

Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio, and saw the continued escalation of ticket
sales and television ratings, as well as legal victories. On Thursday,
November 21, the U.S. Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals reaffirmed the
lower court's ruling in favor of the NFL in the AFL's $10 million antitrust
suit, effectively bringing to an end three and a half years of litigation.
Several owners sent telegrams of congratulation, which were waiting for
Rozelle when he arrived at his office, in a buoyant mood, on Friday,
November 22, 1963.
Earlier that afternoon, Rozelle and Jim Kensil were just returning from
their lunch at the Holland House when they heard the news that the
president had been shot in Dallas. Within an hour after a choked, shaken
Walter Cronkite delivered the news of the president's death on CBS, with
secretaries and executives at the NFL offices walking around in tearful
disbelief, Rozelle made his first decision of the crisis, and began to try to
reach his friend and fellow University of San Francisco alum Pierre
Salinger.
It seemed impossible. Word of the shooting had reached Salinger,
Kennedy's press secretary, on a plane over the Pacific with five cabinet
members bound for an economic summit in Asia. Arrangements were
made for a return to Honolulu, the speediest possible refueling of the jet,
and then a nonstop, full-speed flight to Washington.
The plane touched down at Hickam Field in Honolulu less than two
hours after the first UPI bulletin, and Dean Rusk and Salinger left the
plane to talk to the White House. After being whisked to the Pacific
Command of the U.S. Air Force, Salinger returned to the jet within ten
minutes, just as the refueling was finishing. The jet's door was closing
when word came that the press secretary was needed once more on the
phone.
Escorted by an Air Force officer, Salinger returned to the nearest
phone, assuming that it was the White House with more directives. He
rushed to the phone and picked it up.
“Pierre,” said the harried voice on the other end of the line.“It's Pete.
What should we do?”
Through Salinger, Rozelle had met Kennedy and developed a casual
friendship. Through Salinger, he would make, that afternoon, the

agonizing decision. Salinger never did discover how Rozelle managed to
get through to him during that sliver of time in Honolulu. But in their
two- or three-minute conversation, both men agreed that the president
would have wanted the games to go on, and that the country would be
reassured by the presence of football games on Sunday.
With Salinger's counsel, as well as the recognition that games weren't
scheduled in either Dallas or Washington that weekend, the decision was
made: the NFL would play. Rozelle's statement took the long view: “It
has been traditional in sports for athletes to perform in times of great
personal tragedy. Football was Mr. Kennedy's game. He thrived on
competition.”
In retrospect, of course, the decision to go ahead with the games
would seem crass and misguided. And by the time Lee Harvey Oswald
was killed by Jack Ruby—on national television, less than two hours
before the first kickoff of that Sunday—it had become obvious that the
expert PR man Rozelle had made a grievous public relations mistake.
It was exacerbated by AFL president Milt Woodward's decision that
same Friday afternoon to postpone all AFL games. Commissioner Joe
Foss was out of the office and out of touch, flying from one place to
another. Woodward, searching for a decision, had phoned the NFL
offices in the afternoon and spoken to Kensil, who said he thought they
were going to play the games. Woodward said the AFL was leaning
toward doing the same. But late in the afternoon, after waiting for
several hours with no word from Foss, Woodward sat in his office with
AFL director of publicity Jack Horrigan, scanning the telex as wires from
clubs around the league poured in. At five o'clock, he said to Horrigan,
“Tell ’em that Sunday's games are off. Tell the clubs and call the
network. Here, let me … I'll call the TV people myself.”
While the AFL was lauded for its restraint, Rozelle took a series of
broadsides. “Rozelle's decision was probably the cheapest move ever
made in the history of a sport not noted for good taste, or the grand
gesture,” wrote Charles McCabe in the San Francisco Chronicle.
On Saturday morning, teams got on planes. The Cowboys traveled to
Cleveland, where Bob Lilly would recall that the baggage handlers at the
airport and the porters at the hotel wouldn't handle their luggage.

But the games went on, with only minor modifications. Halftime
festivities at all stadiums were canceled, and a moment of silence was
observed before each kickoff. The Browns canceled a planned halftime
tribute to retiring receiver Ray Renfro, and at the behest of Cleveland
Browns owner Art Modell, when the PA announcers gave out-of-town
scores in NFL stadiums, they refrained from using the word Dallas,
referring to the franchise as “the Cowboys” instead.
In the visitor's locker room before the game, many of the Cowboys saw
the live feed of Jack Ruby shooting Lee Harvey Oswald. As the team
headed out onto the field, quarterback Eddie LeBaron passed the word,
“Boys, put your helmets on and keep ’em on.” Cleveland beat the
distracted Cowboys team. “We were really kind of worried about getting
killed,” said Bob Lilly.“We stood there going, ‘I wonder if there are any
snipers around here?’ We wore our helmets the whole time, and wore
those big parkas.”
In his biography of Vince Lombardi, David Maraniss described the
scene at Milwaukee County Stadium (where the Packers played three
home games each season) that Sunday as an “eerily contained and
somber affair. There was no pregame introduction of the starting
lineups. There were no commercial announcements on the scoreboard.
The television booth was shut down; the only broadcast was on radio.
The only music was the national anthem. No halftime band. The players
were equally subdued. The normally raucous Willie Davis played in
dazed silence at his defensive end position, no swearing that day.”
At Yankee Stadium, where the Giants played the Cardinals in a crucial
game for first place, fans came in with none of the carnival pregame
buzz.
In the press box, prior to the game, the New York Herald Tribune’s Red
Smith encountered Rozelle and announced crossly, “I think you're doing
the wrong thing.”
“Why?” asked Rozelle.
“Because it shows disrespect for a dead president of the United States
who isn't even buried yet.”

“There can be no disrespect where no disrespect is intended,” said
Rozelle.
Even in the wake of the bizarre Oswald killing, the opening moments
of the Giants-Cardinals game still fulfilled some measure of the cathartic
unity that Rozelle and Salinger had imagined. Recalling the scene that
took place when it came time for Martha Wright to perform the national
anthem, the writer Stanley Cohen remembered himself and so many
others in the stadium “singing full-out, for the first time perhaps since a
grade school assembly program … and Martha Wright's voice was lost in
the swell. We sang it that way until the end, and then, in place of the
customary applause that signaled the start of the game, there was only
silence, a silence so deep that you felt as if you had fallen through the
bottom of the world.”
After the stirring, spontaneous communal outpouring of the anthem,
the game began and most present would remember a somber, listless
affair. Cohen recalled the feeling “that we had come together to share
the burden of our grief and that the football game to be played was
incidental to our purpose … as if it were being played very far away and
in three-quarter time.” Joe Pollack, the publicity man for the Cardinals,
would remember it as something watched “from the other end of the
telescope.” Norman Mailer attended the game with George Plimpton, the
two writers sitting silently for much of the contest, feeling the natural
sadness and inevitable portent, recalling as hollow the disconcerting
experience of watching a football game while a country was still
grieving.
Ye t memory can play tricks. The Giants-Cardinals game indeed had an
eerily quiet beginning, and years later, players and commentators alike
would remember how empty and somber the stadium was. But on that
Sunday afternoon, a different truth emerged: six minutes into the second
quarter, facing a crucial third-and-short play, Giants quarterback Y. A.
Tittle walked to the line of scrimmage, surveyed the field, began barking
numbers—and then raised both his arms in the air, delivering the plea
for the crowd to quiet down so his teammates could hear his signals.
Rozelle and the NFL owners had been wrong about the timing, the
fallout, the impact, and the response. But they were right about one
thing: the people wanted the games.

Historians have tended to judge Rozelle harshly for his decision to
play the league schedule, partly because he was so hard on himself. On
numerous occasions in his later years, he would describe the decision as
the greatest single regret of his commissionership.

The most frequent criticism of Rozelle, that he kept the games going
for the money, was baseless. If anything, the decision cost the league
television money. CBS decided not to telecast that weekend, and the NFL
surrendered one fourteenth of the money it was to have made from its
TV contract that year. Had games been rescheduled, and the weekend's
games made up at the end of the season, the NFL would have recouped
its losses.
At least two elements of that weekend's fallout Rozelle could not have
foreseen. He couldn't have known that Oswald would be shot on the
morning of Sunday's games, heightening the sense of chaos within the
country. More importantly, he could not have anticipated the role that
television would play during the long weekend. The previous
cataclysmic events that had been the touchstones for most American
lives—the attack on Pearl Harbor, FDR's death, or the dropping of
atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki—had been experienced
through radio reports. Later events, like the launching of Sputnik, were
reported widely on television, but had scant accompanying visual
evidence. But on that weekend of November 22–24, a nation sat in front
of the television, watching itself mourn, and gaining a sense of itself in a
way it never had before. In that heightened context, Rozelle's decision
would seem like a rash one.
The deeper criticism, that the Kennedy family was offended by
Rozelle's decision to play, was based on a fallacy that assumed that
anyone in John F. Kennedy's circle of grief cared at all about what the
Vikings and Bears did that weekend. The Kennedy family had been
friendly with Rozelle prior to the event, and would remain so afterward.
“I just don't think it was on his screen,” said Ethel Kennedy, trying to
recall the reaction of her husband, Robert F. Kennedy, to Rozelle's
decision. “It was such a bleak time. Certainly, with this family, when
anything bad happened, everybody tried to do some form of activity.
And you could see it either way. People needed something to distract
them.”

Despite the criticism, the sharpest he'd endured during his
commissionership, the year still ended triumphantly for Rozelle and the
league. In early November, Sports Illustrated managing editor André
Laguerre made the decision to name Rozelle as the magazine's
Sportsman of the Year. Laguerre himself had incurred some criticism for
running a picture of Navy's Roger Staubach— rather than a memorial to
JFK—on the cover of SI the week after the assassination. So he wasn't
inclined to change his mind about Rozelle just because of the
unpopularity of Rozelle's decision. The honor had grown increasingly
visible as Sports Illustrated had matured, and Rozelle, as the first
nonathlete to win the award, stirred plenty of interest, many letters, and
much dissent. Though it would later be seen as a visionary selection, its
importance at the time was more significant. “It gave me more
credibility with the old guard of owners,” said Rozelle. “Suddenly, I was
no longer a 33-year-old kid commissioner.” Laguerre saw then what
would only become obvious later: Rozelle was revolutionizing sports as
well as the role of the sports commissioner.
With Hornung on the sidelines, the Packers weren't the same team in
1963, losing the Western Conference title to Chicago. The Bears would
go on to win the NFL title that season, with the sixty-six-year-old Halas
lifting the championship trophy one more time, as Chicago beat the
Giants, 13–10, on another frigid championship Sunday, this time in
Chicago.
A week later, after Sid Gillman's Chargers routed the Boston Patriots,
51–10, in the AFL title game, a few members of the press began to
consider whether the AFL champions might be on par with the NFL
champs. After San Diego's victory, Gillman said, “We're the champions of
the world. If anyone wants to debate it, let them play us.” Even Otto
Graham said he'd pick the Chargers to beat the Bears if the two teams
could have met.
The talk prompted another round of merger whispers, as well as a
Gillman telegram to his old boss Rozelle, which read: “PETE—EVEN
POPE JOHN RECOGNIZED THE OTHER LEAGUE.”
Gillman received Rozelle's reply the next day: “SID—YES BUT IT
TOOK HIM TWO THOUSAND YEARS.”

The coda to Rozelle's amazing 1963 came a few weeks later, in
January 1964, with the first-ever open bidding for an NFL package
television contract. The NFL was increasingly being viewed as one of
television's most valuable properties, a perception enhanced by the
league's
increasingly
sophisticated
marketing
skill.
Baseball
commissioner Ford Frick seemed utterly clueless by comparison. “The
view a fan gets at home,” he said, “should not be any better than that of
the fan in the worst seat of the ballpark.”
Rozelle instructed each network that was interested to submit a sealed
bid at the NFL offices at 11:00 a.m., Friday, January 24. Bill MacPhail
showed up for CBS, Carl Lindemann for NBC, and Roone Arledge for
ABC. The first bid opened, from NBC, was for $10.3 million a season, for
a package of $20.6 million. Then came ABC's bid, for $13.2 million a
season, virtually tripling the annual value of the previous CBS deal,
$26.4 million in all. Finally, Rozelle opened CBS's bid and announced
that the network had come in with a proposal that called for $14.1
million per season, or $28.2 million. Like its competitors, CBS's bid
included a plan to, for the first time, broadcast doubleheader games the
last five weeks of the regular season.
“Pete was always cool,” remembered Barry Frank, then a J. Walter
Thompson advertising exec, later a lieutenant to Roone Arledge at ABC,
who was in the room that day. “He didn't bat an eye, he just read out
each bid. The mood in the room was tense, because this was the future.
The NFL was so big in those days. MacPhail was almost overcome; he
was so thrilled to have it.” Rozelle and MacPhail headed to Toots Shor's
for a celebratory toast, while the representatives of the other networks
left in dejection.
MacPhail recalled later that he was so happy about the winning bid,
he forgot to call his boss, Jim Aubrey. “God, was he enraged. He had
already heard about it—in the men's room, for God's sake—from some
guy who heard it on the radio. He was livid and he told me next time I
better goddamn well remember that I worked for CBS and not the press
or the next time there wouldn't be any goddamn next time.”
The circumstances surrounding the bidding would become part of
television industry legend, with rumors of a mole at ABC leaking the
amount of the network's bid to someone in the NFL, and the strong

belief, by Arledge, that Rozelle had worked in concert with CBS to make
it possible for the established network to submit the top bid.
Decades later, Pat Summerall offered an explanation that added to the
aura of mystery. Summerall was sitting with Bill MacPhail late that
week, when MacPhail got a call from Rozelle. “He tells MacPhail, ‘NBC's
bid is higher than yours and I don't want NBC involved in broadcasting
the NFL. CBS needs to up its bid.’ ”
The Friday of the auction, several of the league's owners were on a
retreat, at Clint Murchison's Island in Spanish Key, eagerly waiting news
though with no phone service to receive it. As the previous contract had
been for $9.3 million over two years, expectations were high for a
significant bump. Art Modell was dispatched to the Florida mainland to
phone New York and get the word.
Reaching Rozelle on the phone, he asked how it had gone.
“Fourteen point one million,” said Rozelle.
After a pause, Modell said, “Well, it could be worse. I had been hoping
for a little more, but, hell, Pete, seven million a year isn't half bad. We
can make it—”
“No, Art,” said Rozelle, interrupting. “Fourteen million per year. Tw e
n t y -eight million for two years.”
There was a longer pause, and Modell's next words were, “Pete, you
gotta stop drinking at breakfast.”
NFL teams had been making $365,000 per season in television
revenues. With the new contract, each club would bring in about $1
million per season. That news was greeted back on the island with
cheers and hugs. Toasts were made, to Rozelle and the brotherhood of
owners, and the imminent demise of the American Football League was
predicted. The elation over the expected collapse of the AFL wouldn't
last long, but satisfaction with Rozelle's performance would. He had won
not just the respect but, in many cases, the compliance of the fourteen
willful, headstrong owners of the National Football League.
Over the next decade, pro football's popularity rode a rocket of social
dynamism, fueled by years of population growth, upward mobility,
television's incursion into the very center of American life, and, not

incidentally, the steady and incontrovertible rise in the quality and
competitiveness of the sport itself. The league still had the mind-set of
an insurgent, albeit a decidedly upscale one, and Pete Rozelle still
popped a cork on a bottle of champagne the morning after the final
game of the World Series, announcing, “Here's to the beginning of
football season.” By then it was clear that his confidence, his ease, his
avid attention had been rewarded. Pro football was on the way.
Even baseball was starting to take notice. As football's attendance and
profile continued to rise, Major League Baseball's crowds remained
largely flat, with much of the growth coming in new markets like Los
Angeles, San Francisco, and Atlanta. As the movement to the suburbs
quickened (there were 35 million American suburbanites in 1950 and
twice that many twenty years later), cities began to stagnate, a trend
frequently cited as a cause of baseball's problems.
Gabe Paul, the Cleveland Indians’ president, was asked in 1964 to
explain why his team had suffered such a glaring loss in attendance. He
reasoned that most fans had moved out to the suburbs, and didn't want
to travel to the city for games at Cleveland Stadium. Apprised of the
comment, Mets manager Casey Stengel mused, “Well, I guess all the fans
moved back to town for football season.”

11

War

W

ith the record-breaking CBS contract in place, the National
Football League began the 1964 season poised for its greatest year
ever. Fortune magazine, in a cover story that fall, noted that the game “is
wonderfully attuned to the pace and style of American life in the 1960’s.
To a nation of spectators, it offers an unsurpassed spectacle. In a time of
mass education, it is an educated man's game.”
The success that the league enjoyed was due not just to the vision of
Rozelle or the serendipity of television, but was also the culmination of a
generation worth of postwar sacrifice, of the commitment of Halas and
Lambeau, the indomitability of Bert Bell, the familial fidelity of the
Maras and the Rooneys, and the fervent, violent struggles of hundreds of
players who played football when it was professional in little more than
name. By the end of the 1963 season, the game had exploded in
popularity, ticket sales and public interest were at an all-time high, and
the CBS deal offered the promise of record revenues to come.
And over the next two years, the entire enterprise was nearly
destroyed.
What began to transpire early in 1964 and continued at a fevered,
ruinous pace throughout the next thirty months was the most
tempestuous period in the history of professional football. The irony is
that, even as the battle critically wounded several teams, rent ownership
in both leagues, and cost both the NFL and the AFL millions of dollars,
the epic war helped pro football. The same elements that jeopardized the
teams and their business plans only made the game itself more

fascinating, more urgent, more pointed—and more newsworthy, with
headlines coming year round instead of just in the fall. The competition
between the NFL and the AFL would resonate long after the peace had
been won. Decades later, when Tex Schramm talked about “the war in
the ’60s,” he was not referring to Vietnam.
By its fourth season, the American Football League had begun to
demonstrate its resilience and appeal. Though the crowds were often
sparse and the playing facilities frequently subpar, the football that the
AFL teams played, once its teams began to gel, was marked by a kind of
inspired spontaneity, a lightness and freedom that was altogether new
for professional football. The eight teams of the new league used their
greatest institutional weakness, the lack of tradition, as a strength: while
AFL owners honored the unwritten agreement with the NFL not to raid
each other's veteran players, they moved aggressively for rookies.
Because of that, the league's players were mostly young, emerging
talents, or reborn journeymen making the most of a second chance. The
coaches were building reputations rather than trying to preserve them,
and so were less susceptible to the cautious mentality that can
metastasize football at any level.
In Los Angeles, then San Diego, where Sid Gillman's imaginative pass
offense was given free rein, the Chargers flipped the old cliché, using the
pass to set up the run. The offense was built not around a back, but the
splendid, balletic wide receiver Lance “Bambi” Alworth, whose talents
were fully exploited in Gillman's system. In Dallas, Hank Stram used
defenses never before tried on the pro level, and on offense developed a
complex array of formations, shifts, and motion, with each new wrinkle
designed to force the defense to wait, or think, one split second longer
before reading its keys and deploying its forces. That there was more
passing than in the NFL was a given. But there also was more daring,
more teams going for it on fourth down, more fake punts, more trick
plays, more busted plays preserved by impromptu laterals, more plays
altogether that were drawn up in the dust on a sideline.
Because of this, and the fact that it was setting up shop in so many
uncharted areas, the league developed a surprisingly loyal following.

The brand of football played in the AFL was enjoyable long before it was
coherent, and its strategy and tactics eclipsed the NFL's at a time when
its talent level had yet to catch up. By the end of 1963, it had eight
functioning franchises operating in eight sustainable markets, all being
run with sound football principles. In the process, it continued to offer
opportunities to players, coaches, owners, and even cities.

Len Dawson had been the fifth player selected in the 1957 draft, by
the Pittsburgh Steelers. What he learned in the NFL was that, even for a
highly touted rookie, opportunities were hard to come by. Dawson's
confidence had waned while his skills atrophied on the bench in
Pittsburgh and Cleveland, where he threw just forty-five passes over five
seasons.
“I remember Paul Brown had us convinced it was bad for football,”
said Dawson of the AFL. “I can remember sitting in a meeting and he
said, ‘This league is not going to last. It's a bunch of sons of rich guys. It's
a hobby with them. They don't know anything about football. The
people playing there are not capable of playing in the National Football
League. They'll be nothing but castoffs and they won't last more than a
year or two.’ That was the attitude the NFL had, and they directed at the
players. So at first we're thinking, ‘Well, this is a bad league.’ It took us a
couple of years to realize,‘Wait a minute. What's so bad about it?’
Because it gives more people jobs, more coaches jobs, and it gives us
maybe an opportunity to be competitive where you might make more
money. So being bright as we are as football players, it took us a couple
years to realize that, but we eventually did.”
Texans coach Hank Stram, who had coached Dawson at Purdue as a
collegian, saw him in 1961, and told him he still felt he could be a
terrific quarterback, and that if he could ever get out of his NFL contract,
the Texans would sign him. After his second season of inactivity in
Cleveland, Dawson asked Brown for his release and, after going
unclaimed by any other NFL team, signed with the Dallas Texans.
“After a while, I had serious doubts of my ability,” said Dawson. “In
five years in the NFL, I never played two games in a row. I never started
and finished a game. I had to ask myself why. One conclusion was that I
wasn't good enough.”

Hank Stram was a plump, prideful, chattering man, a dandy bantam
with a prematurely balding pate who had inherited from his father a
haberdasher's attention to detail, never leaving the house without seeing
that his shoes were shined, usually sporting one of the hundred or so
suits in his closet. But he had an uncommon mastery of the technical
details of football. Shocked in the early weeks of training camp by
Dawson's sloppy fundamentals, Stram overhauled his quarterback's
footwork, throwing motion, and follow-through. He restored Dawson's
confidence and by the time the Texans began the 1962 season, Dawson
had supplanted Cotton Davidson as the team's starter.
In Dallas, the battle between the Texans and Cowboys entered its third
year in 1962, with no winner in sight. Neither team had established
clear superiority in attendance, and both were suffering sizable financial
losses. The big difference was on the field, where the Cowboys were still
building for the future while the Texans were poised to challenge for the
AFL title. Early in 1962, Hunt hired Don Klosterman away from the
Chargers, and made him director of pro player personnel. Klosterman,
the magnanimous former quarterback from Loyola Marymount (a skiing
accident in the ’50s ended his playing career), was a nattily dressed
charmer with a devilish sense of humor and a sharp eye for talent. In the
cat-and-mouse game of player recruitment, the “Duke of Bel Air” was an
expert at coercion.
Just before the season opener that year, Lamar Hunt engaged in his
single instance of owner meddling, making a trade against Stram's
wishes. To the Oakland Raiders, who were struggling to stay in business
and bereft of a quality quarterback, Hunt exchanged Cotton Davidson
(who'd lost his starting job to Dawson) for the Raiders’ first-round choice
in the 1963 draft. Stram was furious at the time, but that November,
with the woeful Raiders last in the league, the choice the Texans traded
for became the first selection in the AFL draft. They chose and quickly
signed the mammoth Grambling defensive tackle Junious “Buck”
Buchanan, about whom Klosterman raved,“He can run a 220 in twenty
seconds flat with a goat under each arm.” Buchanan's selection, less than
fifteen years after Tank Younger was signed as a free agent, signaled a
new era for black colleges. “Once Buck went first,” said longtime
Grambling coach Eddie Robinson, “then the floodgates just opened wide,

and everyone started coming down. Suddenly it wasn't just three or four
scouts anymore.”
A year later, Klosterman hired pro football's first full-time black scout,
Lloyd Wells. “The Judge” was an ebullient, sly ladies’ man, a Houston
photographer with a long list of contacts, a taste for fine things and an
angle on virtually everything. Many pro teams began looking more
closely at the historically black colleges in the ’60s, but Wells made
regular stops at dozens of black schools, and in the space of a few years,
the team selected players from Grambling, Jackson State, Southern,
Prairie View, Morgan State, and Tennessee State, almost all of whom
would become pro stars.
In the jargon of the war between the leagues, Klosterman was the
quintessential closer, someone who could talk to college athletes, get
their attention, and convince them to take a chance on the upstart
league. Flying from Dallas to Minneapolis in November of 1962, he
found himself seated next to Minnesota senator Hubert Humphrey, who
after introductions asked him what he was going to the Twin Cities for.
“I'm going up to talk to Bobby Bell,” said Klosterman.
“You'll never sign Bobby Bell,” said Humphrey flatly. The All–Big 10
defensive end had been drafted by the Vikings and was a local favorite.
“He's going to be our first black mayor; he is the most important player
we've ever had.”
Klosterman spent a week in Minneapolis with Bell, a high school
quarterback and one of the great athletes of the era, and signed him
away from the Vikings, whose complacency would cost them. “The
Vikings and [coach] Norm Van Brocklin just sort of had this attitude
like, ‘Oh, don't worry about it, he'll come here,’ ” said Bell. “But Don
Klosterman was a salesman. He said, ‘Bobby, we really want you with us,
what's it gonna take here?’ ” What it took in this case was Lamar Hunt
approving Klosterman's offer of a five-year, no-cut contract, a rarity even
in the days of big bonuses.
With the Chargers slumping to an injury-riddled 4-10 season, Dallas ran
away with the AFL West in 1962, qualifying to face the two-time
defending champion Oilers for the league title. On December 23, at

Jeppesen Stadium in Houston, the third American Football League
championship game was played, in front of a standing-room-only crowd
of 37,981. Weather was bad across the country, and the game enjoyed
unusually high ratings, viewed by 56 million people. They saw a suddendeath classic that lasted into the sixth period, the longest pro football
game to date, as the Texans took 77:20 to defeat the Oilers, 20–17, in
perhaps the first AFL contest to register on the national sports
consciousness. “The AFL was born at the age of three, so magnificent
was the game,” wrote Shirley Povich in the Washington Post.
Returning home to Dallas for a celebratory Christmas Eve, Lamar Hunt
found himself with a dilemma similar to the one Dan Reeves faced in
Cleveland seventeen years earlier. His team had won its league
championship, but lost money in the process, with little hope of financial
improvement in a divided, fiercely contested market. Though the Texans
had sold 1,100 more season tickets and averaged 200 more fans per
game than the Cowboys in 1962, both teams were suffering from the
fight. The Cowboys lost $2 million their first three years, and Hunt's
losses were nearly $2.5 million.
Convinced that his team needed to be a success for the AFL to survive,
he'd begun furtively scouting out other cities in the fall of 1962. His
initial interest was moving a franchise to New Orleans. He even traveled
there and asked his friend David Dixon, the New Orleans businessman
who'd been working to bring pro football to the city, to set up a meeting
with a few of the board members at Tulane. But seating at the Sugar
Bowl was still strictly segregated and by the end of the year, Hunt's
attention had turned to Kansas City, Missouri, which after having
brought major league baseball to its westernmost frontier in 1955, was
seeking a pro football franchise. On February 8, 1963, Hunt announced
that he would move the franchise to Kansas City if the city would sell
25,000 season tickets and provide free use of an office space and
practice field. Despite the ticket drive stalling at 15,000, the Dallas
Texans left town May 14, bound for Kansas City.
Len Dawson was with his wife, Jackie, in Pittsburgh when he heard
the news. “I mentioned to some friends that the team was going to
Kansas City and they said, ‘Kansas City, Missouri, or Kansas City,
Kansas?’ I said, ‘You mean there's two of them?’ So I had no idea which

one. The thought then, particularly back east, was, ‘Man, you're going to
a cow town. They have horses and cattle running in the middle of the
main street in the city.’ ”
Unreported at the time was the arrangement between the Texans and
Cowboys, who had quietly agreed to buy the Texans’ practice facilities
and, in addition, paid $100,000 (in $10,000 annual payments over the
next ten years) to Dallas for “moving expenses.” The Cowboys were glad
to pay to be rid of the competition and, back in Dallas, Tex Schramm
celebrated, convinced he'd finally freed himself forever of his nemesis,
Lamar Hunt.
While Hunt was wealthy enough to weather the Texans’ losses, some
of the AFL's other owners weren't. In Denver and Oakland, the early
years were an exercise in cut-rate franchise survival. The Broncos had
been in trouble from the start, and the Raiders only survived the 1961
season with $400,000 from Buffalo owner Ralph Wilson, who secretly
loaned the money to Oakland owner Wayne Valley so that the team—
and, in Wilson's mind, the league— could remain afloat. Both teams got
better on the field as a prelude to fixing their bottom line, and both went
to the coaching staff of the Chargers to do it.
Gillman had assembled the best coaching staff in either league in
1960. One of the assistants, Chuck Noll, would spend much of the ’60s as
an aide to Don Shula in Baltimore, but two other Gillman protégés, Jack
Faulkner and Al Davis, saw more immediate results, each winning AFL
Coach of the Year honors, in 1962 and 1963, respectively. The defensive
specialist Faulkner was hired by the Broncos, and organized a bonfire of
the club's laughable vertically striped socks before the 1962 season, then
rallied his undermanned team to a 7-7 record during the campaign.
Davis, taking over the disaster that was the Raiders a year later—they'd
won three games over the previous two seasons— turned the club
around to a 10-4 mark in 1963, and began infusing the team with the
menacing mystique that would later become a trademark.
Dallas, Denver, and Oakland had all been concerns for the AFL, but the
league's biggest problem was in New York. Almost from the opening
kickoff in 1960, the Titans had been an object of widespread public

ridicule, primarily because the egomaniacal owner Harry Wismer
seemed lost in his own delusional world. When the Chargers called to
ask the Titans to send some promotional pictures of their stars, Wismer
mailed 100 8 ⨯ 10 glossies of himself.

A Chargers-Titans game in 1962 brought a crowd estimated as 12,000
by the AP and 7,500 by the Times, and announced by the Titans as
21,467. The home team rose up to beat the injury-depleted Chargers, but
with time left in the fourth quarter, and lights visible from Yankee
Stadium just across the river, Wismer refused to pay the $250 to turn the
Polo Grounds lights on.
Only a $40,000 bailout from the league office (with the other seven
teams pitching in) allowed the team to make payroll through the end of
the 1962 season, and even then matters were made more difficult by
Wismer fighting to retain control of a team he could no longer afford to
put on the field.
The situation looked so desperate early in 1963 that even the league's
founder was ready to give up on the nation's largest market. “I
personally favored the league moving the team out of New York,” said
Hunt. “We had a chance to sell to somebody in Miami, and I didn't think
it was worth staying in New York, playing at the Polo Grounds in front
of 5,000 people. I was very shortsighted; I didn't know how strong a guy
Sonny could be.”
Sonny was David A. “Sonny” Werblin, one of the heads of the Music
Corporation of America, and the leader of the five-man ownership group
that paid $1.3 million to take over the failed franchise. Werblin had
given the AFL a hand in securing its first TV deal, with ABC, in 1960. He
was smooth, shrewd, connected, self-assured, and wealthy—in short,
everything Harry Wismer was not. In the polished persona of Werblin,
the entertainment world saw a new breed of showman, less carnival
huckster than smooth executive deal maker. Werblin's contacts within
the industry were a matter of legend: he had negotiated Ed Sullivan's
lengthy CBS deal, as well as representing the likes of Jackie Gleason,
Alfred Hitchcock, Jack Benny, and scores of others. In 1965, the show
business trade paper Va r i e t y would say of Werblin that, in his three
decades in show business, he “wielded more influence, made more
money, made and broke more careers than perhaps any other show biz

impresario in New York.”
Werblin made an instant splash in the world of football. On April 15,
1963, he announced the launch of the Gotham Football Club, Inc., a
reconstituted Titans team with a new nickname (Jets, which neatly
rhymed with baseball's Mets), new colors (green-and-white, in honor of
Werblin's St. Patrick's Day birthday), a new coach (recently deposed
Colts leader Weeb Ewbank), and plans to move into a new stadium
(Shea, which they'd share with the Mets, in Queens, right next to the site
of the 1964 World's Fair).
After playing one last season in the Polo Grounds, the Jets moved
aggressively in the year ahead, first by outbidding the Giants for Ohio
State All-America running back Matt Snell. In the summer before the
1964 season, Werblin put his full promotional force to bear on
publicizing the Jets. Each of the 3,500 children and teenagers who
visited the Jets’ training camp went home with an “I'm a Jet Fan” Tshirt. A 110-piece “Jetliner Band” was assembled for the games, all of
the stadium ushers at Shea were fitted with green-and-white uniforms,
and the team devised a model Jet airplane that rode around the
sidelines. On AM radio in New York that summer, the airwaves were
dominated by the Jets’ radio campaign, featuring Jet-Set Janie, who
asked,“Hey, what kind of a name is Weeb?”
By 1964, there were only nine former Titans still on Ewbank's roster,
and that 1964 team, with sparkling wideout Don Maynard and
redoubtable linebacker Larry Grantham, averaged 42,000 per home
game despite a record of 5-8-1. They would have the same record the
next two years, but as Ewbank refined the same system he'd had in
Baltimore, he was again fashioning the nucleus of a championship
football team.
As the Giants'Wellington Mara put it,“We didn't know much about
Sonny Werblin when he bought the Jets. And we didn't like what we
eventually found out. He was a much more formidable man than Harry
Wismer, and we pretty soon sort of knew it meant trouble.”
The rebirth of the Jets and the rise of the AFL was well underway by
January 24, 1964, when news of the record-breaking deal between the

NFL and CBS hit the streets. As Rozelle opened the three bids in his
office, Joe Foss sat at the AFL offices, ready to react.
By the time a dejected Carl Lindemann returned to his NBC offices at
11:30 that morning, there was a note on his desk reading, “CALL JOE
FOSS.” Within hours, Lindemann and Foss were sitting in Werblin's
limousine, driving around midtown Manhattan, as Werblin sketched the
outline of the AFL's proposed deal: $36 million for five years, from 1965
to 1969, a five-fold increase over the annual rate that ABC was paying
the AFL over the life of their contract, which had one more season
before expiration. Negotiations intensified throughout the weekend, and
by Monday, NBC had agreed in principle. The deal earned the AFL $7.5
million per year, barely half of the NFL's take, but the key to the
equation was the number of teams in each league. While the NFL was
splitting its $14.1 million per year among fourteen teams, the AFL would
be divvying up its $7.5 million among only eight clubs, meaning that in
terms of annual television revenue per year, the AFL would close the
gap, would actually gain ground on the established league. At 11:00 p.m.
Monday, just three days after the NFL deal with CBS, the AFL executives
celebrated with NBC at Toots Shor's, the same spot Rozelle and MacPhail
had toasted their agreement the previous Friday.
Around NFL circles, still giddy with glee and a measure of infallibility
after the CBS deal, the news hit with a bracing force. “Well,” said the
Steelers’ Art Rooney, “they don't have to call us Mister anymore.”
The war between the leagues meant not just more money for players.
In some instances, it signaled the beginning of a greater measure of
influence, albeit still limited, over the conditions under which they
played and practiced.
This subtle shift in power was reflected in the NFL in 1963 and 1964,
with the jarring sight of the Cleveland Browns being coached by
someone who wasn't Paul Brown.
As Brown left the stage and Blanton Collier took over, many chose to
judge the new leadership by its effect on a single player, Jim Brown. The
results were immediate. After gaining just 996 yards in 1962, Brown
nearly doubled his output the next year, rushing for 1,863 yards, a new
NFL record, as Cleveland improved to a 10-4 mark (after going 7-6-1 in

Paul Brown's final season).
At the beginning, Collier stuck very close to Brown's program. “It was
like Blanton's mouth was moving, but Paul Brown was talking,” said
safety Ross Fichtner. “You would not have known the difference, except
for Blanton's voice. It was as if Paul had written his script.”
And yet, somehow, everything was different. Collier, who had always
been considerate, even kind, to his players, brought a new synthesis,
combining his mastery of the game's technical details, a modernistic
belief in positive reinforcement (he had a master's degree in educational
administration), and a fierce emotional loyalty (he shook hands with his
left hand, because it was “the closest to my heart”).
Collier proved much more able than Brown to cede some measure of
autonomy to his players. On road trips, the Saturday night pregame
movie continued, but the film was now chosen by team vote, rather than
by the coach. On the field, the checkoff system allowed the quarterback
to audible to a different play at the line of scrimmage if the defensive
formation threatened the one called in the huddle. Collier also used a
broader lexicon for pass routes, allowing more flexibility within routes
and in overall patterns.
The biggest change came in blocking philosophy. Instead of Brown's
static blocking assignments, Collier was a proponent of option blocking.
As Browns lineman John Wooten explained it, “You come off the ball,
place your head in the center of the chest of the defensive player. If he
flows to either side, you immediately continue him going—you continue
to help him go that way. No matter what the defensive player did, he
was going to be wrong.” The Browns called it the do-dad block; in Dallas
it was the slip wedge. Both techniques shared the same philosophical
underpinnings as Lombardi's “run to daylight,” and in each instance,
players received more flexibility, more freedom, within a system.
“One of the reasons that I welcomed Blanton at the time is because he
gave me that ability to truly express myself in the years that he was
there,” said Jim Brown. “You see coaches sometimes don't want players
to have input—and great players must have input. Because when players
got together to discuss things, we would deal with the reality of a play,
not the theory of it. Blanton had been a coach with Paul, so he knew all

that stuff, and he gave us the freedom. And it was the freedom that I
remember most. Loved most.”
After the 1963 season, Collier sat down for his annual systematic
analysis of the previous season. After screening all fourteen games,
charting every player's performance in every play of every game, he
began to articulate a lingering uneasiness he'd felt throughout the entire
1963 season. Collier came to the conclusion that one reason the club
lacked the cohesion it needed was that it was becoming more racially
divided than ever. The problem had been simmering for at least a
decade, over numerous slights as large as salary inequity to a lingering
resentment among the black players on the team over their exclusion at
certain club-sponsored cocktail parties. “They don't invite us to the
parties and events with the pretty white girls, then we won't go to those
community functions, that boring, political shit, where they want to
make us look like one big happy family,” Jim Brown said. “If we can't go
to all the stuff, the fun stuff, then we won't do the fake stuff. They room
us together, we'll stay together. We'll play hard, dress right, carry
ourselves with class, and be team people. But we don't have to kiss any
ass, or take any attitude, to pacify some redneck from Mississippi.”
That off-season, Collier summoned his team leaders and issued a
directive that he would not tolerate the racial divisions that he was
seeing. By confronting the problem openly, and relying on Brown and
the other team leaders to solve it, Collier paved the way for a tightly knit
Browns team that rolled in 1964, averaging nearly 30 points per game
on the way to an Eastern Conference title. In the 1964 title game, the
Browns would play host to the heavily favored Baltimore Colts, who had
experienced a rebirth in the second year of new head coach Don Shula.
The game itself was a bruising draw in the first half, with neither team
able to score in the cold, muddy conditions. But in the second half, the
Browns’ offense broke through, with Jim Brown's 46-yard run setting up
the first of three Frank-Ryan-to-Gary-Collins touchdown passes.
Cleveland's defense confounded Johnny Unitas and the league's highestscoring offense, sealing a 27–0 shutout to give Cleveland its first world
championship since Otto Graham's last game in 1955.
In Palm Springs, Paul Brown watched the game with his sons,
suffering more or less in silence as his team, with his name, coached by

his friend, defeated the Colts. Nearly two years after being fired, the pain
was still too fresh. “My father would watch a little bit,” said Mike
Brown. “Then he'd have to get up and walk out. Then he'd come back in
after a while.”

The victory validated Modell's decision to fire Paul Brown and hire
Collier, but it hinted at something else as well. Even as Vince Lombardi's
autocratic style was engendering both fear and loyalty in Green Bay,
Collier's success proved there was another way for a coach to reach
modern athletes, and provided a framework in which Jim Brown could
emerge not just as a star, but a team leader.
In a rudimentary way, the successful racial reconciliation of the
Browns players offered a tentative first step—for management, the
media, and many pro football fans—toward learning to accept the
modern black athlete on his own terms. Just as there were people in
Boston who couldn't abide Martin Luther King, Jr., but would learn to
appreciate Bill Russell, so it was in Cleveland, where many who were
bewildered by Malcolm X and notions of black power would grow to
respect Jim Brown. This was not, of course, a substitute for true empathy
or political enfranchisement, but it offered a hope, and a beginning
toward a broader understanding.
By the mid-’60s, observers were beginning to see within pro football a
reflection of the explosion of technology in American society at large.
While baseball remained firmly rooted in the cumulative generational
traditions known as The Book, the unwritten bible of the sport's wisdom,
pro football's coaches seemed to embrace many of the new technologies
of the jet age, in the hopes that they might provide some small but
crucial advantage.
As far back as the ’20s, technology was seen as a potential edge in the
ceaseless competition of football. Bert Bell, when managing his father's
hotel in Philadelphia, had noticed that desk clerks would signal to
housekeeping that a room needed to be cleaned through a device known
as a telautograph, which allowed a person sitting in one place to write a
message on a slate, which would then be read instantly on another slate
elsewhere. Bell used the device while an assistant at Penn in the late
’20s, sitting in the press box to spot opponents’ formations, and
peppering head coach Lou Young on the Penn bench with the details.

Secure phone connections from press box to bench eventually
superseded the telautograph, but it wasn't the end of sideline
innovations. Lombardi devised his Polaroids-on-a-pulley system in 1953
and, in 1957, Rams GM Pete Rozelle suggested the team try out the
technology of the Ampex Corp. (one of his clients during his time with P.
K. Macker and Co.), which had just developed a videotape machine that
allowed for instantaneous playback. This met with the approval of the
film-obsessed Sid Gillman, and in the fall of 1957, Ampex shot videotape
of the Rams game.
The next step, taken by the Cowboys in the early ’60s, would be
toward computers. At the 1960 Olympics in Squaw Valley, Tex Schramm
had been fascinated with the information generated by an IBM
computer, which calculated statistics, medal standings, and record times.
Frustrated during his time with the Rams about how long it took to
wade through the avalanche of data on college seniors, Schramm was
convinced that computer technology could be used to organize the
scouting data, and more reliably isolate the most salient information.
After he returned from the Olympics to start work full-time with the
Cowboys, Schramm called IBM and explained what he wanted to do.
That's what led him to Salam Quereishi, a computer programming expert
in the Service Bureau Corporation, an IBM subsidiary in the burgeoning
Silicon Valley of Palo Alto, California. Quereishi, an Indian who'd
received a master's degree in mathematics at Aligarh, India, was a
cricket fan who knew nothing of American football. After a halting first
meeting in which Schramm's gruff manner and Quereishi's thick accent
made it difficult for either man to understand the other, they moved
more slowly, methodically establishing what Schramm was seeking to
accomplish, and how computers might help.
Very quickly, Schramm realized he'd need to remake the scouting form
to make it more standardized. For the computer to do its job, the
Cowboys needed to pare away the colorful language of the scout's trade:
“Quick as a cat” was out, in favor of a form that required more easily
defined input. The team eventually came up with a new questionnaire
that had fifteen statements, each describing a particular skill. Players
were rated from a scale of 1 to 9, a 9 if they fit the scale exactly, down
to 1 for not fitting it at all. And because the team was concerned with

the more minute gradations on the positive side, the scale was
unbalanced, so that a 3 was average.
Computers were a massively expensive undertaking, and Schramm
saw that the Cowboys needed partners to share the burden of
investment. He selected the Rams and 49ers, teams he knew well (but
both from the Western Conference and thus not direct competitors). The
49ers’ general manager, Lou Spadia, had heard Dan Reeves express an
interest in the potential of computers as well, and both were amenable
to making a joint investment. Over the next four years, each team would
contribute more than $300,000 to developing a computer model that
could evaluate players. It would be four years before the Cowboys would
be ready to implement anything, but they had the prospect of a future
edge. And in the meantime, they'd formed the first scouting combine, a
surreptitious group code-named Troika.
By 1964, Schramm was ready to implement a system that was a
synthesis of past and future. It would incorporate the old-school notions
of bird-dogging and beating the bushes with the Rams-inspired
thoroughness that had become the norm for the league, while adding a
third element, a new mind-set that attempted to quantify every opinion.
While the raw data and analysis was shared, each team used it in its
own way. Though all three clubs recognized the same five “critical
factors” of football skill—“quickness and agility,” “competitiveness,”
“character,” “mental alertness,”“strength and explosion”—each team
weighted these attributes differently. The same was true of the positional
characteristics (quarterbacks, for example, were also rated for things like
poise and setup, while receivers were graded on their ability to react to
the ball and run after the catch).
There would still be—there would always be—room for horse sense
and intuition in the Cowboys’ system. During the 1964 draft, when it
took Dallas six hours to draft Mel Renfro in the second round (the team
was checking on the status of his knee and seeking assurances they could
sign him), Landry called it a day after Dallas had used their three picks
in the sixth round. Armed with the team's master board and a gambler's
sense of possibility, Schramm used a seventh-round pick to select Florida
A&M wideout Bob Hayes, who months later would win the gold medal
in the Olympic 100-meter dash. In the tenth round, he took a flier on

Heisman Trophy–winning quarterback Roger Staubach, whose five-year
tour of duty upon graduation from the Naval Academy in 1964 had
scared most teams off.
And besides the intuiting and organizational intelligence of Schramm,
there was also the omnipresent Gil Brandt, a driven man who became a
master of the little gesture; he'd send footballs to college coaches,
birthday cards with Cowboy stickers to their kids, anything to advance
the cause of the Cowboys.
By the fall of 1964, the four years of intense work began to yield
results. The Cowboys’ executives were on hand for the first printout, as
the IBM 7090-7094 computer produced its data on wide sheets of
perforated paper. Among the myriad lists that were printed out for
Dallas, after players were sorted according to a variety of criteria, was a
list of the top fifteen prospects overall. At the top of the list was a
cocksure quarterback from Alabama named Joe Na-math.
In this case, Schramm knew the computer was working because it had
confirmed the wisdom of the best scouts in the field. John Huarte of
Notre Dame and Jerry Rhome of Tulsa had finished 1-2 in the Heisman
voting in 1964, but in the fraternity of pro football, they were also-rans.
Scouts and coaches had been buzzing about Joe Namath for years.
Al Davis was still an assistant with the Chargers in 1962. After an inseason scouting trip to watch an Alabama game in 1962, he came back
sporting a sly, knowing grin.
“What'd you see?” asked Gillman.
“I saw a guy who tips the field,” said Davis, a dose of portent added to
his typical air of certitude.
“What do you mean?”
“This sonofabitch plays like he's going downhill,” said Davis.
“Who is it?” asked Gillman.
“A kid, Namath, out of Pennsylvania.”
At a Jets press luncheon in the fall of 1963, Werblin was raving about
Miami quarterback George Mira, who'd just beaten Nebraska in the
Gotham Bowl. A few minutes later, a writer asked Ewbank what he
thought. “Well, George Mira's really an exciting football player,” he said.

“But I've known for a long time that those great small guys don't win a
championship for you. And they're great quarterbacks—Eddie LeBaron,
Frankie Albert, Fran Tarkenton— they're great ball-handlers and all that.
But we're interested in a championship.” And then, almost as an
afterthought, Ewbank added, “The guy that would intrigue us is this
junior quarterback at Alabama.”
What set the young Joe Namath apart was a strong arm and one of the
quickest releases in the history of the sport. The steelworker's son from
Beaver Falls, Pennsylvania, also possessed an intuitive ability to read the
defenses and “see” the field, combined with—at the time, before a litany
of knee operations—uncommon mobility that made him a dangerous
running threat. Sonny Werblin divined something that had eluded the
scouts and the computers. He realized that Namath had not only talent,
but some ineffable added component of charisma and glamour that
could make him something much more than just a skilled rookie
quarterback with a big contract. “No one actually knows what it is,”
Werblin once said to a friend. “But it's people like, when Joe DiMaggio
walks into a room. I don't think anyone can put their finger on what
exactly it is, but there's no doubt that this guy's got it.”
The Giants, with the retirement of Frank Gifford, had free-fallen to the
bottom of the NFL East in 1964. They were looking first for a halfback,
but had been concerned about the possibility of the Jets getting Namath.
Wellington Mara, after reading reports that the Oilers had the rights to
Namath—“they were giving people oil wells and gas stations at the
time,” said Mara—directed the team to go ahead and select running back
Tucker Fredrickson. Then came the news: the rights to Namath had been
traded to the Jets, in exchange for the rights to quarterback Jerry
Rhome.
The Giants desperately tried to trade with the Cardinals for the rights
to Namath, but St. Louis was convinced it could sign him. The Cardinals
would prove no match for Sonny Werblin. After talking with two
representatives from St. Louis in early December, Namath flew out for
the Jets’ December 6 game at San Diego. Namath had originally hoped
for a $100,000 deal, but Alabama coach Bear Bryant convinced him to
ask the Cardinals for $200,000, which they'd reluctantly agreed to. But
at Namath's first meeting with the Jets and Werblin, the team's opening

offer was $300,000. By the time Namath's lawyer, Mike Bite, was done
negotiating, Namath was the owner of a Jet-green Lincoln Continental
and a three-year contract, believed to be the largest in American team
sports at the time, worth $427,000.
The contract, in detail, looked like this:

1965 salary $25,000
1966 salary $25,000
1967 salary $25,000
1968 option year (renegotiable upward) $25,000
Bonus (deferred) $200,000
Lawyer's fee (10% of salary package) $30,000
Lincoln Continental automobile

$7,000

Brother's salary, as scout, for three years $30,000
Second brother's salary, as scout, for three years $30,000
Brother-in-law's salary, as scout, for three years $30,000
TOTAL $427,000
On January 2, 1965, the day after Namath played brilliantly in
Alabama's Orange Bowl loss to Texas, Werblin announced the signing to
banner headlines. Namath going to an AFL club was itself big news, but
it prompted many other stories—the astounding contract, the predictable
response from veterans, such as the Browns’ Frank Ryan, fresh off an
NFL title, who said “If he's worth $400,000, then I'm worth a million.”
If they had overspent, the Jets and Werblin chose the right man on
which to do it. Namath was a leader with a swagger, and the
combination of his mod, shambling persona along with the full effect of
Werblin's promotional skills— in addition to the New York media's
heightened interest in pro football— made for an irresistible story. “With
that kind of salary,” said Bob Hope in a monologue, “Joe Namath will be
playing quarterback in a business suit.”

After averaging 14,000 fans their final season at the Polo Grounds and
42,000 their first year at Shea, the Jets—with the rookie Namath
starting by the third week—began selling out Shea, averaging 58,000
fans on the season.

His first home game drew 55,658, more people than attended the
entire Titans’ home schedule in 1962. What was also evident was the
effect Namath had on the football field. Coming in during the second
quarter of the Jets’ second regular season game, with the Jets trailing
Kansas City 7–3, he rifled a pass to Don Maynard in the middle of the
field for his first completion.“A year earlier Don Maynard and Matt Snell
had been waiting for something to happen,” wrote Jerry Izenberg of the
Newark Star-Ledger. “The something happened that night. A franchise
that had once looked as though it had been stocked at random from the
white pages of the Leonia, New Jersey, telephone book, had become a
football team.”
The Jets’ signing of Namath, along with the NBC contract, reinvigorated
the AFL, and palpably raised the stakes in the war between the leagues.
Though their contract didn't originally call for payments until 1965, NBC
advanced five different AFL clubs $250,000 each to help them cover
signing bonuses in November of 1964, on the eve of the 1965 draft.
Signing players offered a double advantage, in that it had the zero-sum
result of bringing a good player into one league and out of the other, and
it furthered the perception in the press that “the war” was being won. At
the height of the conflict, the battle between the NFL and AFL took on
tones of the Cold War, full of secrets, suspicion, and intrigue.
After the loss of players like Buck Buchanan and Bobby Bell in the
1963 draft, and Matt Snell and Southern Cal quarterback Pete Beathard
in the 1964 draft, Rozelle began casting about for a way the league
could respond with a more concerted effort. On a visit to his old team in
the summer of 1964, he found it. In Los Angeles an invigorated Dan
Reeves, back in his owner's office for a full year by then, was still
obsessing on the draft, still intent on finding an edge. Well ahead of his
competitors, Reeves had identified a special need in the reality of a twoleague world.“We need to get an earlier start on relationships,” he told

Rozelle. “It should be like rushing someone in a college fraternity.”
Reeves had devised a plan, to be implemented by former Rams PR
director Bert Rose, in which a group of Los Angeles businessmen,
salesmen, advertising executives—each one having a strong background
in sales or public relations—would make contact with players the Rams
were interested in weeks prior to the draft. By establishing a relationship
with a player beforehand, Reeves figured, the Rams would have a big
head start on whichever AFL team would be vying for the player.
Reeves hadn't even finished explaining the idea before Rozelle, eyes
sparkling with excitement, realized that if it could be done successfully
in Los Angeles, it could be done throughout the league.
Rozelle asked Reeves if he could borrow Rose and put him in charge
of the procedure on a league-wide basis. Thus was conceived “Operation
HandHolding,” better known as the NFL's baby-sitting program. Around
the NFL office and throughout the league, a call went out for suitable
execs who could strike up relationships with prospective choices prior to
the draft, and help close deals when the time came. Rozelle buttonholed
his friend Jack Landry at Philip Morris, who brought in many of his
friends. “We didn't call them ‘babysitters,’ ” said Rose. “We called them
‘NFL representatives.’ We put the program into operation in about three
weeks. We had about eighty men, about thirty of whom were friends of
mine and the rest who were recommended by friends. Almost all of them
had the same thing in common: they were sales-oriented. They had to
be, since we were asking them to sell the NFL to the best pro prospects
in the country.”
By November 1964, the program was in place, with more than 100
NFL “field men,” each working off of a set of instructions for wooing
prospective players. The brochure given to each of the baby-sitters prior
to their orientation outlined “The Problem” (“the establishment of a
strong competitor to the NFL in the form of a second league”) and “The
Solution,” which theorized that “the addition of just one major sales
technique” would improve the chances for signing any player an NFL
club drafted. The pitch to be added would be to “mentally condition”
prospective draftees to the advantages of the NFL well before the time of
the draft.
The jobs offered little beyond prestige: baby-sitters were offered a

choice of $50 per day for the two weeks leading up to the draft, or a gift.
The first year the gift was a Zenith radio; in 1965 it was a Tiffany silver
platter with the NFL shield engraved on it, along with eight cordial
glasses. The baby-sitter program included an embossed “gold card” that
essentially gave the bearer the privilege to get on any United Air Lines
flight with the cost billed to the league. The gold cards carried some
prestige among junior and senior executives in and around New York
City. Rozelle's friend Jack Landry, a baby-sitter for all three years of the
program, bragged that he used his gold card to avoid a speeding ticket
on the Merritt Parkway. It turned out to be an excellent investment for
the NFL.
At its most extreme, the baby-sitting program was equal parts auction,
fraternity rush, and velvet-gloved kidnapping. One operation found
twenty-seven different players stashed away in a hotel in Detroit, and
the AFL teams interested in drafting them repeatedly frustrated in trying
to get through. In that same 1965 draft, the Kansas City Chiefs had high
hopes for signing the dazzling running back Gale Sayers from Kansas.
“Sayers, in fact, was married to a girl from K.C.,” said Hank Stram,“and
he told us he was definitely signing with the Chiefs, when suddenly
Buddy Young of the NFL flew into town and simply made off with him.”
Sayers signed with the Chicago Bears.
Even after losing Sayers, the Chiefs didn't come away empty-handed in
the 1965 draft. That draft included one of the war's greatest cases of
signing intrigue, and certainly its most legendary, the one for Prairie
View A&M wide receiver Otis Taylor. At 6-foot-3, 220 pounds, fast,
strong, a physical blocker, and a marvelous athlete with dazzling long
strides, Taylor was a spectacular glimpse of the future of the wide
receiver position. Decades later, Klosterman would say, “When I first
saw Jerry Rice, the person I thought of was Otis Taylor.”
The Chiefs were confident they would sign Taylor; Lloyd Wells was a
friend of the family, had known Taylor since junior high school, and had
remained close to him throughout his college years. But on Wednesday,
November 25, in a classic case of baby-sitter subterfuge, the Cowboys
descended on the Prairie View campus and invited Taylor and teammate
Seth Cartwright away to spend Thanksgiving in Dallas, with handshakes
and a kind of pushy cordiality. Of course, the players could have insisted

they were staying put, or asked to contact Wells, or the Chiefs. But
Taylor, while bright, was hardly sophisticated. And the reality of the
South in the mid-’60s made it highly unlikely that a twenty-one-year-old
shy black college student was going to gracefully extricate himself from
the situation.

While Taylor was being squired away, Wells was down in Tennessee,
trying to keep tabs on another prospective Chiefs choice. Klosterman,
checking with Taylor as a matter of course, was alarmed when repeated
calls to his dorm went unanswered. “So I called Otis's mother,” said
Klosterman, “and told her that I thought her son had been kidnapped.”
Wells, having heard from Klosterman, rushed back to Texas and began
scouring the Houston area, calling Taylor's mother, his girlfriend, and
many of his friends. He learned that Taylor and Cartwright had been
taken to a Holiday Inn in Richardson, Texas, just outside Dallas, where
they were being watched over by Buddy Young and another baby-sitter.
When Wells tried to go see Taylor, he was recognized instantly, and the
Cowboys representatives wouldn't let him through the lobby.
Wells was providing periodic reports to Klosterman, who during one
call told him, “Just tell Otis his red T-bird is parked outside the Kansas
City Chiefs facility, waiting for him.” Late that evening, as Taylor looked
out the back window of his hotel room, he saw his agitated friend, Wells,
hissing to him to get ready to leave. “You don't come with me right
now,” said Wells, “I am going to lose my motherfuckin’ job. Goddamn
you!—after all the pussy I done got you! Now get down here, and let's
fly to Kansas City; there's a red T-bird waiting for you.”
As soon as they were convinced they could escape without detection,
Taylor and Cartwright decided to make their break. They didn't even
pack their luggage, but instead grabbed their jackets and silently headed
out the back patio and over the fence. The next day, after signing his
contract, Taylor joined the Chiefs on a trip to New York for a Jets game,
then returned with the team to Kansas City and proudly drove his new
red Thunderbird home to Houston.
The Chiefs, Oilers, and Jets succeeded with a mixture of canny
scouting, superior recruiting and deep pockets. One other team with
particular success at fighting the NFL's baby-sitters was the Oakland
Raiders. Although they didn't have the financial wherewithal of other

clubs, they did have coach and general manager Al Davis, who by 1965
was developing a reputation in both leagues. The New York Times’s Bill
Wallace wrote that Davis “is the man the NFL management fears most
when it comes to signing impressionable and needy collegians.”

With his slicked-back hair, Brooklyn roots, and cryptic nature, Davis
had both the aura and aspect of the eccentric rock ’n’ roll producer Phil
Spector, possessing many of the same qualities of mystery and brilliance
as the other man. On the same November 1964 weekend of the Taylor
heist in Texas, Davis was running the draft for the Raiders. Oakland
signed Florida State wide receiver Fred Biletnikoff before officially
drafting him, and spirited away the big offensive lineman Harry Schuh,
staying one step ahead of the Rams’ Hamp Pool (and prompting Pool's
telegram to Dan Reeves,“BOO HOO, I LOST MY SCHUH”) and its babysitters in a chase that started in New Jersey, camped briefly in Las Vegas,
and wound up in Hawaii. Davis was already developing a mystique as
someone who would do anything within the rules, and perhaps a few
things beyond them, to win. As Schuh would recall of Davis, “He'd take
his hands, run ’em through his hair, suck air through his teeth, and he'd
say, ‘Let me just say this, young man. Anything good in this life is worth
cheating for.’ ”
As the civil war in pro football raged on, there was proof of pro
football's gain on a wider battleground for the loyalty of American sports
fans. In November 1965, Rozelle received a semi-annual report,
commissioned by the NFL, from the Louis Harris and Associates polling
group, titled “A Study of the Effectiveness of the Television Broadcasting
of National Football League Games.”
The organization conducted interviews with 3,000 households across
the country (about twice the size of a normal Nielsen television survey)
during a mid-October weekend, to survey the attitude of sports fans. The
second page of the eighty-nine-page report consisted entirely of a twosentence finding that would have been unthinkable even a decade
earlier: “AS OF OCTOBER, 1965, FOOTBALL HAD BECOME AMERICA'S
NO. 1 SPORT. THE PREVIOUS APRIL, FOOTBALL HAD FINISHED
SECOND TO BASEBALL AS THE NATION'S FAVORITE PASTIME.”
Harris concluded his report with the observation: “It is quite clear that
the full potential of NFL football has hardly been tapped. Proper

promotion and exposure should be able to greatly expand the NFL
audience, and television can undoubtedly play a major role in
broadening the base of fans.”
It was a moment of triumph for Rozelle and the league, and the NFL
did its best to trumpet the news. But the elation over the sport's
ascendance was tempered throughout the rest of that year and the
ensuing off-season with the cumulative fatigue and financial instability
that the war between the leagues brought. Rozelle was still confident of
ultimate victory and, after six years of the NFL battling the upstart AFL,
the costs of war had been accepted as part of the game. But the NFL's
optimism and assuredness was beginning to be tempered by frustration
over the AFL's resilience and their own vulnerabilities. “We thought the
AFL was in trouble,” said Art Modell. “They would have lost some
franchises. But hell, by then, it was becoming obvious—we would have
lost some franchises, too.”
As 1966 arrived, the war between the leagues entered its seventh year,
more expensive and acrimonious than ever, with no end in sight.

12

A Separate Peace

F

or six seasons, Tex Schramm had carefully constructed the
foundations for what he immodestly considered the ideal football
franchise, building the Dallas Cowboys to his own exacting
specifications. They were a team possessed of unusual speed and
athleticism, and were also among the most intelligent teams in pro
football, by virtue of the refinement of the Cowboys’ aptitude testing and
computer scouting program.
From the start, Schramm received a generous budget from owner Clint
Murchison, as well as something he considered even more important—
autonomy to construct the team his way. Schramm owned a small
percentage of Cowboys stock, and usually sat in for Murchison at owners
meetings, where he earned more respect than affection from his peers for
his restless intelligence and relentless parsing of the league's bylaws and
rulebook. William Clay Ford, the Lions’ owner, referred to Schramm as
“Loophole.”
Before the Cowboys had the record or championships to justify it,
rivals sensed an arrogance on their part that was at least partially a
reflection of Schramm's self-assured insistence on doing things a certain
way. At the team's training camp in Thousand Oaks, California, he
brought in legendary Stanford track coach Payton Jordan, not only to
help his players refine their running techniques, but to teach the
Cowboys’ scouts how to use a stopwatch with more precision than
others.
That fine-grained attention to detail typified Schramm's fertile mind.

Even in the matter of appearance, the Cowboys pointedly did things
differently. By 1963, Schramm had grown dissatisfied with the Cowboys’
all-white uniforms and white helmets. He wanted a look that was
modern, dignified, yet clearly original. What he envisioned was a novel
shade of blue, different from what had ever been seen on a football
uniform. And in private sessions with the uniform supplier Rawlings, he
“asked them to make me some material that had not been made before”
in a color that would be at once shiny, discernibly blue, and distinctively
Dallas. The unique color, ultimately called metallic blue, could look gray
or silver or even light blue, depending on the time of day and light
hitting it. Once Rawlings delivered the pants, Schramm summoned the
helmet manufacturer Riddell and asked that they match the color to the
helmet (a tricky task because of the vastly different materials and
textures involved). Both companies were sworn to secrecy and, in the
1964 preseason, Dallas players came out to the Cotton Bowl in metallic
blue helmets, crisp white jerseys with blue numerals, and the shiny
metallic blue pants, whose texture and sheen called to mind nothing so
much as the shimmering space-suits of the Mercury 7 astronauts.
There were snags along the way, but Schramm was steadfast and
Murchi-son backed him throughout. In Sports Illustrated’s 1963 pro
football preview, Schramm's buddy Te x Maule picked Dallas to win its
conference in only its fourth season. When the team stumbled to a 4-10
record, bringing a storm of criticism of Tom Landry, Schramm wanted to
reaffirm his faith in his coach with a ten-year contract. Murchison signed
off on it. When Schramm's computer scouting expenses soared to nearly
a half-million dollars, Murchison agreed to pay it. But when, a few days
before Thanksgiving in 1966, Clint Murchison blanched for the first
time, Tex Schramm knew the war between the leagues was getting out of
hand.
The buildup to the 1966 draft, held the weekend after Thanksgiving in
1965, set the two leagues on a path of mutually assured destruction.
Teams were paying unheard-of sums for top-flight rookies, with
contracts totaling $25 million by one estimate. The Oilers’ Bud Adams
wrote $850,000 in bonus checks alone, and would have written more if
the Oilers’ most celebrated draftee, All-America linebacker Tommy Nobis

of Texas, had chosen to sign with them. Nobis was on the cover of Life
magazine, and the subject of a national—in fact, interstellar—bidding
war. Astronaut Frank Borman, a Houston resident and Oilers fan whose
sons were ballboys for the team, spent two weeks in orbit with James
Lovell on the historic Gemini 7 mission in December 1965. During one
broadcast the astronauts beamed back on national television, Borman
said, “Tell Nobis to sign with the Oilers.” In the end, Nobis signed with
the NFL entry, the expansion Atlanta Falcons.
In many ways, the draft had been a rousing success for the NFL.
Babysitters were assigned much earlier than in the previous year, and it
paid dividends the weekend of the draft. Ostensibly held at the Summit
Hotel, just across the street from where the AFL was conducting its draft
at the Waldorf-Astoria, the real NFL draft was being run a few blocks
uptown, in secret, at the Lexington Hotel, known within the league as
“Draft Central.” There Bert Rose commanded a support staff in telephone
contact with more than 100 babysitters, providing progress reports on
each player's signability and information on any activity from the AFL.
More than 300 players were listed on chalkboards, along with terse
notes about each one's status—“Jets offered $225,000 and 4-yr.
contract,” “Tough!! Wants dough,” “Giving rep a hard time,” “Denver …
will set girl friend up in beauty shop”—and teams went through the
Draft Central switchboard to contact players.
Baby-sitters were assigned much earlier as the program took full effect
in 1965. The NFL bragged of its high success rate and by mid-December
announced that it had signed 140 of its draft choices, losing just twentyeight to the AFL. But that number was deceptive, because many of the
players taken in the early rounds by some teams hadn't been first-round
caliber. “During those years,” said the Cowboys’ Gil Brandt, “for a lot of
teams, it wasn't about drafting the best player available so much as the
best signable player available.”
The Cowboys were never one of the have-nots. But on the Tuesday
night before the draft, Schramm was up until 4:30 in the morning,
negotiating with Chicago attorney Arthur Morse, the agent for Illinois
running back Jim Grabowski. Morse was determined to hear offers from
both leagues, and wouldn't agree to any offer until they had. Meanwhile,
the Packers had already offered a package of more than $500,000 if they

selected Grabowski, and that was where Clint Murchison instructed
Schramm to drop out.
When the time came for its choice, Dallas chose Iowa guard John
Niland. Grabowski wound up going to the Packers, for an $850,000
contract. The unique nature of the publicly owned Packers dictated that
all profits went back into the team, rather than to shareholders, meaning
that when teams were spending the most money, Green Bay had the
most money to spend. Schramm was a competitor at everything he did,
and he hated losing a player for any reason. But losing a prized prospect
like Grabowski for reasons beyond his control—he simply would have
cost too much—left him furious. “That was the first time we couldn't get
a player because of money,” said Schramm.
By the fall of 1965, it was no longer just a few franchises. The impact
was felt even in San Diego, where the Chargers, heading to their fifth
AFL championship game in six seasons, were losing money. “It was all so
costly,” said Sid Gillman. “There were very few men who could stand the
losses the owners absorbed in those years. At the draft, we'd have two
blackboards, one with the names of players who would cost big money
to sign, the other with those who didn't figure to come high. We always
drafted from the second board.”
After the season, Schramm spent several nights of contemplation in his
ranch house in North Dallas, often sitting for hours in his office and
looking out at his expansive front yard. Most worrisome to him were the
implications of the draft. The Green Bay Packers had just won another
world title, their third in five seasons. And Schramm could see that if the
situation persisted, the present environment would only empower the
league's strongest team, and perhaps lead to the death of some of the
weaker ones.
Tex Schramm made up his mind. The battle had gone on long enough.
The warrior wanted to fight for a truce.
“It was hard for me,” he'd say decades later. “I wanted to kill the AFL.
I still do. But from a practical standpoint, the league had to be successful
first or the Cowboys’ success wouldn't mean anything.”
The negotiations toward a merger in 1966 were so complex and

secretive, so multilayered and fragmented, that even after the dust had
settled, many of the particulars still clung to differing accounts of the
entire process. Fitful, furtive negotiations had been going on among
owners for years. In addition to the months of back-channel negotiation
in the fall of 1959, Lamar Hunt had a few meetings with George Halas in
the early 1960s, including visiting the Bears owner in 1963 at his winter
home, the Arizona Biltmore Hotel in Phoenix (a meeting Schramm also
attended). In 1965, there were extensive negotiations between Carroll
Rosenbloom and Ralph Wilson, with one round occurring at La
Caravelle, the tony Washington, D.C., restaurant co-owned by
Rosenbloom and Joe Kennedy. Bobby and Ethel Kennedy were dining
that night and, after spotting the owners at dinner, RFK sent over a
menu in which he jotted down mock accusations against the two
leagues. (In fact, Kennedy supported a merger, and had offered to help
with antitrust legislation after the fact.) Later in 1965, as matters were
moving to a head, Schramm joined Carroll Rosenbloom and Art Modell
for a meeting in Miami with Ralph Wilson. But when the indemnity
price of joining the league was named—Wilson would recall the asking
price as $50 million—the Buffalo owner announced the meeting and
negotiations over, and walked out.
In virtually every one of these negotiations, the NFL position had been
that, while it would consider a merger under certain circumstances, it
wasn't interested in taking all the teams, and the two AFL clubs in NFL
markets—the Jets and Raiders—would have to move. And so it was, at
first, with Schramm. “My original plan was to get Oakland out of
Oakland and the New York Jets out of New York,” Schramm said.“I
talked with Rams owner Dan Reeves in Los Angeles first. To give up New
York, there had to be a major city available for the person who had the
Jets. Werblin had been with MCA and was close to the Hollywood
picture. Los Angeles and Hollywood would be an attraction to him. I
talked to Reeves about moving out of L.A. to either San Diego or
Phoenix.”
But by the spring of 1966, such elaborate scenarios were no longer a
realistic option. When Schramm contacted Pete Rozelle and explained
that he wanted to try to strike a deal with the AFL, the two of them
called Hamilton Carothers, the league's flinty, precise general counsel.

Carothers explained that there was no way the leagues could come
together without congressional approval, because any and every
antitrust suit that the unified league would subsequently face would risk
repealing the entire merger itself. While there was a widespread belief in
NFL circles that at least two or three AFL franchises still hadn't proved
their viability, Carothers pointed out to Rozelle and Schramm that any
franchise that was killed or moved would only prompt every legislator in
the state to rise up in opposition to the entire merger.
Furthermore, any negotiation with the AFL would need to be top
secret, and couldn't afford leaks. “If you open it up,” warned Carothers,
“everyone will want to put their own conditions on it and nothing will
ever get done.”
So before making any contact with the AFL, Schramm contacted the
Giants’ Wellington Mara and the 49ers’ president, Lou Spadia, to tell
them what he had in mind. Both were opposed to the thought of a
truce.“I do recall,” said Spadia, “I didn't agree with a single thing he
said. I was so opposed to it.” But Spadia, as had Mara, said that he'd try
to keep an open mind.
For the sake of secrecy, Rozelle agreed that Schramm, representing the
NFL, should negotiate with a single person from the AFL. Schramm's
counterpart would need to be someone discreet and influential within
the other league, someone who could be trusted to keep the negotiations
a secret. Then Rozelle let Schramm reach the inevitable conclusion
himself.
“I suppose,” Schramm said, an expression of mocking distaste curling
his lips, “it's got to be Luh-maahr.”
Kansas City had been slow to embrace the Chiefs, in part because of the
negative experience with another itinerant owner, the confounding
Charles O. Finley, who had purchased the Kansas City Athletics in 1960,
and had been trying to move them ever since. “This is a horseshit town,”
Finley told Hunt upon their first meeting in 1963. “And no one will ever
do any good here.”
Hank Stram would euphemistically describe Kansas City in the ’60s as
“not far removed from its frontier heritage,” but the truth was something

more pernicious. The city, like so many American cities in the ’60s, was
a victim of white flight to the suburbs, and an increasingly dangerous
environment around the downtown area, where the Chiefs played their
home games at Municipal Stadium. This was particularly true in the
heart of Kansas City, sprinkled with a series of mean little bars and
dimly lit nightclubs, some of them still under Mafia control. In 1964,
guard Ed Budde was brutally beaten in a bar fight, with one assailant
bashing him repeatedly with a lead bolt. After surgery, Budde had a
metal plate in his skull and his return was initially considered doubtful.
In 1965, tight end Fred Arbanas was jumped on the street and wound up
losing vision in one eye.
A tragedy finally brought the team and the town together. One of the
Chiefs’ early stars was Mack Lee Hill, from Texas Southern, brought to
the club in 1964 by the redoubtable scout Lloyd Wells, who signed him
for a $300 bonus. Late in the 1965 season, Hill ruptured a knee ligament
after catching a pass against Buffalo. During knee surgery, his body
reacted to the anesthesia and developed hyperthermia, rising to 108
degrees. He died on the operating table. The gravity of his death was felt
in the city in a way that the Chiefs’ struggles on the field hadn't been,
and humanized a team that many Kansas City fans had previously held
at arm's length.
Just weeks after Hill's death, the Chiefs faced a public relations crisis
over comments from Don Klosterman that implied the team might move
to Los Angeles. Coming on the heels of another Klosterman statement,
comparing Kansas City to purgatory (“it's not exactly heaven and it's not
exactly hell”), the comment exacerbated an already strained situation,
and forced Kloster-man's resignation. In so doing, the Chiefs finally
proved they were there to stay. Though Hunt still lived in Dallas, he and
his wife, Norma, had rented an apartment in Kansas City that winter, to
focus their energies to a season ticket drive that lifted season ticket rolls
from 9,550 in 1965 to more than 21,000 in 1966.
On April 4, Schramm called Hunt in Kansas City, and asked if he
“might be able to come to Dallas to discuss a matter of mutual
importance.”
Hunt was returning to Texas two days later anyway, to attend an AFL
owners meeting. He scheduled a layover in Dallas before continuing to

Houston. On the evening of Wednesday, April 6, Hunt got off his plane
at Love Field in Dallas, and walked to the statue of the Texas Ranger in
the terminal's lobby. There, waiting adjacent to the statue, reading a
paper, was Schramm. They shook hands and quietly moved to the door,
walking into the vast Love Field parking lot, where they sat in
Schramm's Oldsmobile, and spoke for about forty-five minutes.

Once inside the car Schramm delivered his message. “I think the time
has come,” he said, “to talk about a merger, if you'd be interested in
that.”
“Fine,” said Hunt, evenly. “I'm interested.”
Schramm made a few things clear: the NFL would want Pete Rozelle to
be the commissioner of a merged league, further discussions would have
to be confidential, and the NFL was finally willing to consider a merger
in which all existing franchises would be accepted into the NFL. After
their discussion, Schramm said he would call Hunt later in the month to
talk more specifically about a framework for a deal. Much of the college
signing frenzy had died down by April, and it seemed a good time for
truce talks.
For two days, it was. But on April 8, at the AFL owners meeting in
Houston, Commissioner Joe Foss resigned (when it became clear that he
would be fired by the AFL owners if he didn't). Criticism of Foss had
grown steadily over the years, and the success of the NFL's baby-sitting
program, and its eleventh-hour landing of Atlanta as an expansion
franchise (after the AFL had announced it would move to that city) only
weakened his position.
For its new commissioner the league elected Al Davis. This was an
alarming choice for leaders in both leagues. For starters, Davis was
hardly loved within the AFL. Writing a year earlier in Sports Illustrated,
Bud Shrake noted that outside of Oakland, “it is not certain where Al
Davis would finish in a popularity contest among sharks, the mumps, the
income tax and himself. If the voters were the other American Football
League coaches, Davis probably would be third, edging out income tax
in a thriller.” But still chastened over the results of the 1966 draft, the
majority of AFL owners decided Davis would be the perfect man to run
the league in the event that the war continued.

While Davis promised to take the fight to the NFL, Hunt was secretly
discussing peace with Schramm. On May 3 Schramm informed Hunt that
the NFL would likely want $18 million—$2 million from each of the
nine AFL teams (Miami would be the league's newest franchise in 1966)
—and the expansion fee that would be charged to a tenth AFL team in
1968. Hunt asked for a week to think about it and, when they met again
at Hunt's home, on May 10, he said he believed an agreement could be
reached. With this hopeful sign, Schramm called Rozelle to tell him that
there was a framework for a possible agreement. With an owners
meeting coming the next week, Schramm and Rozelle discussed the best
way to present the possibility of a merger to the rest of the league.
Since the very first stipulation set by the NFL was that Rozelle would
be the commissioner of the combined leagues, there was no easy way for
Hunt to tell Davis that he was working on an agreement that would cost
Davis his job. So while Hunt privately mentioned some details of the
negotiations to Bills owner Ralph Wilson and Patriots owner Billy
Sullivan, Davis was left out of the loop.
Meanwhile, Davis was already looking ahead to the logical next battle,
the 1967 draft. His first hire was Ron Wolf, a hard-bitten, slow-talking
personnel man who'd assisted Davis in Oakland, and was brought to New
York to oversee the league's next round of recruiting. Wolf had learned
to cope with his boss's volatile nature, his temper (“I've been called 29
different kinds of motherfuckers”), and his habit of releasing information
in the slightest of doses. He also knew that if Davis had a plan, it could
work.
Davis also brought in fellow Syracuse alum Val Pinchbeck, who'd been
working as the school's sports publicity director, the young Texas
sportswriter Mickey Herskowitz, and CBS publicist Irv Kaze. With his
staff in place, Davis began preparing for the AFL's response to the NFL's
baby-sitter program. Within the walls of the AFL offices, where frenetic
action took place, Davis was infamous for telling his charges only what
they absolutely needed to know and sometimes not even that. His asides
and portentous explanations added to the heightened tension, and
Davis's perpetual shroud of secrecy became a running joke. When
Herskowitz and Kaze would meet in the halls, one or the other would
blurt out, “By Thursday, you'll understand everything.” It's difficult to

know what Davis might have done on his own. But such questions
became a moot point, in the event, because within six weeks after taking
office, the NFL provided Davis and the AFL with a plausible reason to
escalate the war.
For nearly seven years, the two leagues had honored the unwritten
agreement that, while they would compete for incoming rookies through
their respective drafts, they would not attempt to sign the other league's
veterans. That policy came to an end in May when the Giants signed the
Buffalo Bills’ soccer-style placekicker Pete Gogolak, who had been the
second leading scorer in the AFL during the Bills’ title seasons of 1964
and 1965. Gogolak kicked a pro record 28 field goals while playing out
the option year of his contract in 1965. The Giants, by contrast, had
made just four out of 26 field goal attempts during the 1965 season.
At the Winged Foot Country Club, the Giants’ Wellington Mara had
grown friendly with Fred Corcoran, the agent for Gogolak. When
Corcoran told Mara his client was interested in the Giants, Mara didn't
flinch. New York signed Gogolak to a three-year, $96,000 contract, the
largest ever for a place-kicker. It was, arguably, the single most
provocative act of the decade in the war between the leagues.
The signing of Gogolak was still a closely guarded secret when the
NFL owners began their spring meetings at the Shoreham Hotel in
Washington, D.C., on May 16. The next day, after a morning session in
which the owners argued about the merits of a league-wide scouting
system, Rozelle called for a brief executive session before a lunch break.
Rozelle stood up before the group and said, “I have an announcement
to make …”
Down near the end of the conference table, an already steaming
Lombardi, who'd learned about the signing earlier that morning, looked
across at Lou Spadia and Art Modell and said, “You're not gonna believe
what you're about to hear about my best friend …”
As Mara sat silently by and listened, Rozelle announced the Giants’
signing of Gogolak—a shock itself to most owners—then added that as
there was nothing in the league's bylaws to prevent a team from signing
a free agent who had played out his option, the league would permit the

signing.
“This is a disgrace!” announced Lombardi.“Wellington, I can't believe
that you would do something like this, to put us all into jeopardy!”
“Goddamnit,” said Carroll Rosenbloom to Mara,“if you'd wanted a
kicker, why didn't you just ask me? I'd have given you one.”
Sitting at the table, Schramm finally understood why Rozelle had
seemed so tepid about his merger plan. “What I never realized until this
whole thing broke out—and I can understand because he was so much in
the middle of it—is really how badly Pete wanted to beat them and
didn't want a merger,” said Schramm. “And I never realized that until
the moment he announced he was approving the Gogolak thing.”
That afternoon in Detroit, Al Davis was sitting in the insurance office
of Bills owner Ralph Wilson when the news broke. Wilson was stunned
and furious about losing his star kicker, and even angrier at the NFL's
precedent-setting provocation.
Davis leaned back in his chair and smiled at Wilson, and said, “We just
got our merger.”
“What? What are you talking about?” asked a perplexed Wilson.
“Look,” said Davis. “If we go out and sign their players, we'll destroy
them, and they'll come to the table.”
Davis's aide Ron Wolf was in San Francisco when he got the news. He
turned to his wife and said, “They have no idea what they've just done.”
After news of the Gogolak signing broke, Schramm quickly called
Hunt to reassure him that, despite appearances to the contrary, the NFL
owners were nearing an understanding, and the senior league was acting
in good faith. But since the negotiations were going on without Davis's
knowledge, there was little that Hunt could do to stop Davis from his
own counterattack.
Davis returned that night to the Plaza Hotel in New York, and in a
cryptic interview told the New York Times’s Arthur Daley, “This is
something I've been aware of, and I anticipated the probability. But you
don't make threats at a time like this. Our answer will be in action. This
is not the time to speak.”
Within twenty-four hours of the report of Gogolak's signing, Davis

devised a plan of response. “We pinpointed about ten players of the
National Football League that we would sign them to contracts for the
ensuing year if they played out their option or, this was something new,
sign them to what we called ‘future contracts,’ even if they had a year or
two left on their present contract,” said Davis. “Then we decided that
there was one team we would hold hostage. And if we held them
hostage, we thought that their league would get the message to either
leave us alone, or else let's get together. One or the other.” Nearly forty
years later, Davis revealed his target, which should have been obvious to
any student of the works of Machiavelli. “It was the Rams,” Davis said.
“And the reason it was the Rams was because their owner, Dan Reeves,
was beloved. And Tex and Pete had a strong affinity for Dan, had started
their careers with him in Los Angeles.”
The NFL owners who were worried about how Davis might respond
didn't have to wait long to find out. By the time the meetings adjourned,
there were reports that Sid Gillman and the Chargers had offered
contracts to three New York Giants players. Weeb Ewbank, denying any
coordinated campaign, said the NFL players were the ones contacting the
AFL.
On the afternoon of the final session of the owners meeting, Rozelle
addressed the owners in executive session and confided to the group for
the first time that negotiations with the AFL had reached a critical
juncture. He then gained approval for a six-man committee—Schramm,
Mara, Spadia, Lombardi, Bidwill, and Rosenbloom—and instructed that
group to determine their plan of action among themselves. Upstairs in
one of the Shoreham suites, the group discussed the next course of
action, with Mara and Spadia holding out for a continued fight. During
the meeting, a glum Spadia lashed out at Lombardi, who, he said, “had
promised never to vote for a merger. Our friendship ended that day.”
Mara put an arm around his distraught friend Spadia. “It was bad
enough when the enemy was shooting at us,” he said. “Now we've got
our friends shooting at us, too.”
The meeting was invested with a desperate urgency, because an
awareness of Mara's decision to drop the gauntlet had made the next
chapter obvious: if they didn't do something to bring peace, the ensuing
war, especially one in which the enemy forces were led by Davis, would

mean that not all of the owners would be in the same room by 1967. As
they talked among themselves, more matter-of-factly, it became clear
that the only logical choice was a merger.
“The only teams that I dealt with that were anti-merger were San
Francisco—I didn't blame them—and New York,” said Stormy Bidwill.
“Those are the only two that I remember being very anti. Everybody else
may have put on a little bullshit but they wanted a merger of some kind.
Now, they didn't want to give away the store, but they definitely wanted
a merger.”
As the meeting ended, Lombardi and Rosenbloom pulled Schramm
aside and gave him a message for Rozelle.“Tell him we want to go
ahead,” said Lombardi.
“We want him to lead us,” Rosenbloom told Schramm, before
adding,“but we're going, with or without him.”
Arriving at Rozelle's suite, Schramm sat down with his friend, who
had been huddling with Marshall Leahy in another room.“We reached a
decision,” Schramm said. “We want the merger, and we want you to lead
us in the merger. But if you're not going to lead us in the merger, then
we're going to have to go ahead without you.”
Rozelle, stunned and furious, rose to his feet and excused himself to go
into the bathroom.
Hands on the sink, staring into the mirror, Pete Rozelle considered all
that he'd fought for and all that he'd gained. A man with an oversized
ego might have stormed out in a huff, or resigned. But Rozelle's next
move, one Schramm would never forget, left him more convinced than
ever that Rozelle was the right man to lead them.
Schramm waited in silence for a few minutes, then heard the faucet
running, and Rozelle splashing water on his face. Rozelle returned to the
living room of the suite, face set in determination, and, walking toward
the door, said, “If that's what they want, let's go do it.”
The next morning, when the committee of owners met again, this time
in New York, with Rozelle present, Schramm once more expressed his
desire to find some way to get the Jets and Raiders to move to other
markets. Hunt hadn't agreed to such a condition (and would say later
that Schramm had never mentioned it to him), but Schramm suspected

the AFL wanted an agreement badly enough to capitulate.
Wellington Mara doubted that, and argued that Werblin's team was so
entrenched in the city, the point was by now moot. “If I try to get the
Jets to move,” he said, “I'd be crucified.”
At that point, it was decided that the Giants and 49ers should receive
some sort of compensation, since the violation of their territorial
exclusivity was against league bylaws. The figure that Schramm
suggested, as a way to placate the two teams, was to simply funnel all
$18 million of the AFL's indemnity payments to the two clubs, $10
million for the Giants and $8 million for the 49ers. But Mara still wasn't
satisfied, arguing that it was one thing to have Joe Namath across town
playing in another league but something else entirely to have Joe
Namath across town as a member of the National Football League. In
exchange for the Giants’ acquiescence, the league awarded New York the
first pick in the next draft, with a stipulation that they would take a
quarterback. (The Giants could trade it only if they were trading for a
starting quarterback.)
The support for a merger in principle now existed. After that meeting,
the future shape of pro football depended largely on the outcome of a
secret race. On one side, Schramm and Hunt were engaged in their
increasingly detailed negotiations to bring about the terms for a peace.
On the other side, Davis, unaware of the truce talks, was waging his
concerted response to the Gogolak signing, a war of retribution on behalf
of the AFL that at times threatened to make any peace impossible.
On May 23, just three days after the NFL owners meetings had
adjourned, the AFL had its first response. In Oakland, the Rams’ young
quarterback, Roman Gabriel, met Raiders coach John Rauch at the
Oakland airport, and received a bonus check for $100,000, then signed a
contract for four years at $75,000 per year, for a package of $400,000.
The deal, announced by the Raiders on May 26, quickly brought a retort
from the Rams stating they had just signed Gabriel to a contract renewal.
And it was in that tense context that the events of the Memorial Day
weekend played themselves out. Hunt was up in Indianapolis, to watch
the Indy 500, while Schramm and Rozelle hid out in Schramm's house in
Dallas, drawing up the key points of the proposed agreement, in an

attempt to “finalize the terms of the plan” to present to Hunt by the end
of the weekend. Meanwhile, Al Davis, amid periodic cryptic comments
to his staff—“The guerrilla wins if he doesn't lose”—was working on
another stage of his concerted response to the Gogolak signing.

At Davis's behest, Don Klosterman—by now the GM of the Houston
Oilers—turned his attention to John Brodie, the 49ers’ starting
quarterback, whose contract was up for renewal. Klosterman had known
Brodie for ten years, understood how fanatical the quarterback was
about golfing (he'd played two years on the PGA tour) and believed he
could be wooed.
“John,” he told Brodie by phone, “we're in a position down here to
offer you some cash. We can set things up so that if you want to, all
you'll ever have to do is play golf and drink beer and gamble.”
That Friday, May 28, Brodie headed to Houston along with his friend
and unofficial financial adviser, a securities broker named Sonny Marx.
After they checked into Room 306 of Houston's Warwick Hotel, under
the name John Marx, they were visited by Klosterman and the
quintessential Texan Bud Adams. Adams made an opening offer of a
$500,000 contract for three seasons, and hung in there when Marx
audaciously countered with the statement that Brodie should be making
closer to a million. After haggling for a bit, Adams wrote out the terms
on a cocktail napkin: “The AFL agrees to pay John Brodie $250,000 a
season for three seasons.”
With that staggering offer on the table, Brodie called 49ers general
manager Lou Spadia, whom he tracked down at a hotel in Portland, just
getting ready to leave for his son's graduation. In their previous
conversation, just days earlier, Brodie had asked for a contract of
$40,000 per year, while Spadia had held firm at $38,000.
When Spadia got the call, he was initially delighted. “John!” he said.
“What are you doing in Portland?”
“I'm not in Portland,” said Brodie, “I'm down in Houston.”
“What are you doing in Houston?”
Brodie explained his trip, and the ensuing contract negotiations with
the Oilers.

“Lou,” he said, “they want to pay me $250,000 a year for three years.”
There was a moment of silence on the line. And then Spadia said,
“Gee, John … does that include preseason games?”
Later that night, an apoplectic Lou Spadia phoned Dallas with the
news about Brodie's offer.
“And so here it is,” recalled Schramm, “we've worked this all out and
now we've got the Brodie situation. And so we want to get ahold of
Lamar, and he's up in fucking Indianapolis at this race. Well, if you've
ever tried to find anybody up there, it's damn near impossible. We
finally got him, and I told Lamar, ‘Look, I can't hold these people
together. They're going to get mad and they're going to do something,
and if that happens, the merger is gone. You gotta stop this sonofabitch.”
Hunt called Bud Adams and Klosterman, to try to dissuade them from
going through with the signing. By now, Davis knew some merger
negotiations were going on, but wasn't aware of the particulars. He was
angry at being left out of the loop, and determined that continuing his
program would only increase the AFL's bargaining power.
Klosterman called Davis, who was supervising other negotiations,
trying to sign Jim Ninowski from Cleveland and Sonny Jurgensen from
Washington. “Lamar called,” Klosterman reported to Davis,“and said he
really doesn't want us to go through with this.”
Davis was pensive.“Did you give him your word?”
“Yeah, I'm afraid I did.”
Davis paused for a moment, considered the circumstances, and then
said, “Fuck it! Sign him anyway.”
Davis then called Hunt and explained that whatever he was working
on, his bargaining position would be stronger with Brodie signed than it
would be without his signature. In this, he was probably right. San
Francisco's front office was shell-shocked, and by now resigned to the
merger. In the days ahead, Lou Spadia became adamant about retaining
Brodie, above all else. “I just want my quarterback,” he repeated.
Hunt returned from Indianapolis late the night of May 30, and the
next morning, they met at Schramm's house. Speaking from five pages of
notes he compiled with Rozelle, Schramm outlined the plan. Writing on

a legal pad, Hunt transcribed the specifics. When he finished, Schramm
said,“There it is.
If you accept, this deal has been approved by every NFL club. If you
have to alter it too much, it will blow up.”
Hunt flew to New York later that day, to meet with the AFL owners,
many of whom balked at the figure of $18 million. “They should pay
us,” said Werblin. But Hunt knew a good deal when he saw one. “I was
just beginning to understand the true value of money,” he said. With
twenty years to pay off the total, it amounted to a payout of $2 million
per team over the twenty years, with much of the money coming from
accrued interest. This paled in comparison to the instantly increased
value and revenues for each team in the league, as well as the reduced
costs of a stabilized environment with a common draft.
Over the next few days, the negotiation got down to the fine-grained
details of the agreement. Hunt called Schramm back by phone and
outlined the twenty-six points with which the AFL took issue, almost all
of them involving the wording of the agreements between the two New
York clubs and San Francisco and Oakland. On Sunday night, June 5,
meeting back in Dallas at Schramm's home, they ironed out nearly all of
the remaining sticking points. By the morning of June 7, when Rozelle
gained approval for the merger through a telephone poll of owners,
rumors were running rampant and the press was staked out at the NFL
offices. Rozelle took to taking service elevators in and out of the building
to avoid detection. Carothers advised releasing the information as soon
as possible, before the rumor mill damaged the fabric of the relationship.
On the evening of June 7, while Hunt was traveling to Washington for
more secret meetings, Billy Sullivan sat down with Al Davis and told him
he was about to be out of a job. Davis was angry, about being excluded
from the negotiations, and about the terms of the agreement. “I wanted
a merger,” Davis said. “But I didn't like the terms of the merger. I
thought it would be great because we can compete against those guys.”
Later that night, on the eve of the announcement, Hunt, Schramm,
Rozelle, and Kensil converged in Washington, D.C., still eluding the
press. At the Sheraton-Carlton Hotel, in a suite registered under the
name of Ralph Pittman, they spent much of the night banging out the

wording for the press release the next day, finally finishing at 3:00 a.m.
Throughout the evening and the next day, Carothers fielded phone calls
from team lawyers, one who asked to vet a copy of the signed
agreement. “There is no signed agreement,” said Carothers. “It's all just
notes, from Te x and Lamar.”
The press release came out that afternoon, Wednesday, June 8, with
young NFL interns Peter Hadhazy and Joe Browne delivering the news
by hand to the AP and UPI offices. It read:
JOINT STATEMENT NATIONAL AND AMERICAN FOOTBALL
LEAGUES
The NFL and AFL today announced plans to join in an expanded major
professional football league. It will consist of 26 teams in 25 cities—with
expectation of additional teams in the near future.
The main points of the plan include:
Pete Rozelle will be the commissioner.
A world championship game this season.
All existing franchises retained.
No franchises transferred from present locations.
Two new franchises no later than 1968.
Two more teams as soon thereafter as practical.
Inter-league pre-season games in 1967.
Single league schedule in 1970.
A common draft next January.
Continued two-network TV coverage.
After sending them out to drop the news, Rozelle called CBS Sports
president Bill MacPhail, who still hadn't heard the news. “Got a pencil
handy?” Rozelle asked. “Then take this down …” He then disclosed the
outline of the merger agreement.
“You can't mean it!” barked MacPhail when Rozelle reached the part

about the AFL-NFL championship game, which effectively reduced the
NFL championship game, for which CBS was paying $2 million a year,
into a semifinal contest. “It can't be true!” Rozelle assured him that it
was true, and that a press conference would be held later that day, at the
Warwick Hotel in New York.

Furious, MacPhail demanded, “Why didn't you notify me that you
were planning this?”
“Because,” said Rozelle calmly, “it was our business and nobody
else's.”
As news of the agreement filtered out over the radio, New York's news
and sports media geared up for the press conference. Late that afternoon,
with the AFL offices abuzz with the victorious news, Val Pinchbeck, suit
coat on, preparing to leave, saw an unusually subdued Al Davis sitting
alone in his office.
“Aren't you going to the press conference?” Pinchbeck asked.
When Davis shook his head no, Pinchbeck asked why.
Davis looked at his assistant gravely and asked, “Remember Yalta?”
There was one matter left to be dealt with, and that was the task of
convincing Representative Emanuel Celler and the House Judiciary
Committee to approve the merger. As the fall wore on and the owners
grew increasingly alarmed, it became clear that Celler had no intention
of letting the legislation pass. At a hearing in the Rayburn House Office
Building on October 11, 1966, Celler upbraided Rozelle and Hamilton
Carothers, refusing to let the bill out of committee.
Rozelle, seeking a way to break the logjam, called his friend David
Dixon to see if he knew a North Louisiana congressman on the
committee. “For someone as sophisticated as Pete, he was rather naive
when it came to politics,” said Dixon. “The idea that any congressman
from Louisiana was going to be able to change Emanuel Celler's mind
about anything was ludicrous.”
Dixon had a better idea. House Majority Leader Hale Boggs, who'd
been a fraternity brother of Dixon's at Tulane, was seeking to regain
some popularity after his vote in support of the civil rights bill caused
his electoral majority to drop from 67 percent to 55 percent. Dixon sent

his political adviser, David Kleck, up to Washington the next day, to
impress upon the patrician Boggs, no sports fan, that it would help his
cause to push the bill through, especially since doing so would virtually
guarantee an NFL franchise in New Orleans.

The NFL had been eyeing New Orleans for its next franchise anyway.
So a thinly veiled quid pro quo was offered—a franchise for New Orleans
in exchange for the exemption—and Boggs went into action,
circumventing Celler by attaching S. 3817 to a budget bill sure to pass in
both houses.
The final approval would come October 21. Walking up the stairs of
the Rotunda, when the vote looked like a sure thing, Rozelle was his
usual humble self. “Congressman Boggs, I don't know how I can ever
thank you enough for this. This is a terrific thing you've done.”
Boggs had been a veteran of Louisiana politics too long to let such
transparent politesse go unremarked. “What do you mean you don't know
how to thank me?” he said.“New Orleans gets an immediate franchise in
the NFL.”
“I'm going to do everything I can to make that happen,” Rozelle
assured him.
At that, Boggs stopped and turned on his heels, heading back to the
committee room. “Well, we can always call off the vote while you—”
Rozelle took two giant strides after Boggs, turned him gently around
and said, “It's a deal, Congressman. You'll get your franchise.”
“If this doesn't work out,” said the patrician Boggs, by now perturbed,
“you will regret this for the rest of your fucking life!”
It worked out, signed by another presidential football fan, Lyndon
Baines Johnson, who'd taken to ordering highlight reels from NFL Films
sent to the movie theater at the White House. The NFL and AFL got their
merger and, a week later, New Orleans got its NFL franchise.
The “cause” of the merger would be debated for years. Both leagues
seemed to be operating on twin tracks. The NFL had a hard-line
commissioner determined to fight while at the same time authorizing a
secret bargaining initiative from one of his closest friends, another hardliner who had decided the time had come to merge. The AFL, formed

largely because of its owners’ unrequited interest in joining the NFL, had
spent seven years trying to prove worthy of the older league. Then those
same owners hired as commissioner a man seemingly intent on bringing
down the NFL at any cost. One commissioner, Rozelle, would have lost
his job if he hadn't brought about the merger, while another
commissioner, Davis, lost his job because he did help to bring it about.

In retrospect, a few events do stand out as crucial. It was important
that Schramm had opened communication lines with Hunt prior to the
Gogolak signing, because establishing a baseline of good-faith bargaining
would have been nearly impossible in the weeks after, with the Davischoreographed “massive retaliation” that followed.
It was significant that the cool, deliberate Hunt was the pivot on
which the AFL owners and NFL owners communicated. Men on both
sides of the battle would lose their patience and bark at him, but Hunt,
even-tempered through it all, was in a position to moderate the rhetoric
of both sides.
And if Davis's machinations behind the scenes in the weeks after May
17 didn't help the spirit of the negotiations, they certainly hastened the
endgame. The two sides had been talking for years, but the prospect of
seeing the likes of Gabriel, Brodie, and the Bears’ Mike Ditka in AFL
uniforms brought a grave urgency to the negotiations that the older
league's owners had never felt before.
After a rocky courtship, the NFL and AFL were finally engaged, and
would now spend four seasons before their union was fully
consummated. In dramatic terms, the merger was a false ending, for it
only served to bring the combatants into closer proximity. Wellington
Mara described the atmosphere at the first joint meeting as akin to that
“on board the USS Missouri.” After six seasons of bitter one-upmanship
and bloated contracts, the two leagues headed into the 1966 season as
familiar enemies. The war was over, but the rivalry was destined to
linger. Now, however, the coming battles would be determined on the
field.

13

“The Only Thing”

A

s pro football rose in popularity in the ’60s, almost in counterpoint
to the youth movement and anti-Vietnam fervor on college
campuses, it began to take on a larger symbolic meaning. For a growing
group of middle-class adults, the game itself served as a kind of social
touchstone, which recognized and honored—especially in the archetypes
like John Unitas—the eternal verities of hard work, dedication, respect
for authority, and community.
If Unitas was the embodiment of this spirit among players, Vince
Lombardi was the apotheosis among coaches. In his 1963 best-seller Run
to Daylight!, Lombardi spoke of the way the game occupied his mind
during almost every waking hour. Recounting his trip to the office one
morning, he noted, “There is a traffic light at the corner of Monroe and
Mason and I stop behind a line of cars in the left lane. When that leftturn arrow turns green, and if everyone moves promptly, six cars can
make that turn. Six days a week this traffic light is the one thing that
invades my consciousness as I drive to work, that constantly interrupts
that single purpose of winning next Sunday's game.”
Nowhere was Lombardi's attention to detail more manifest than in the
Swiss-watch precision of the brutal, beautiful Green Bay power sweep,
the single play around which much of the Packers’ offense was built. At
coaching clinics, Lombardi would spend eight hours discussing the
intricacies of the play, interrupting only for a short lunch break.
Jerry Kramer, the all-pro lineman, would remember Lombardi
pounding his troops with the phrase, “Winning isn't everything, it's the

only thing.” Bill Curry, the erudite center who played on the Packers’
1965 world champions, recalled it differently. “Winning is not the most
important thing—it's the only thing,” was how Curry remembered the
statement. “You might hear that every day for three weeks! Never
deviated.”
Whatever the exact wording, the sentiment as attributed to Lombardi
became a lightning rod, as divisive a motto as Barry Goldwater's
“extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice” speech during the 1964
campaign. Those who would criticize Lombardi and the institution of pro
football found in the “winning is the only thing” phrase a soulless mindset that typified everything from male chauvinism to American manifest
destiny. His admirers, of course, saw something in the man and the sport
that was completely different: a standard at a time when standards
seemed to be slipping, a commitment to respect the game and its larger
purpose, a testament to the ennobling effects of desire and willpower.
There was in here, as well, an unapologetic desire for excellence. After
hearing a pregame speech in which Lombardi invoked St. Paul's epistles
and concluded that the key to Paul's teachings was that one must “run to
win,” Kramer concluded, “Vince has a knack for making all the saints
sound like they would have been great football coaches.”
As pro football evolved and grew more specialized, the importance of
coaches continued to grow. There was a mathematical logic to this: in
the age of forty-man rosters and two-platoon football, with kicking and
return specialists, the significance of any single player was diluted. Stars
were still important in football, but depth of quality players and degree
of commitment were more important. (Nowhere was the interdependent,
collaborative nature of the game more apparent than in the fortunes of
the Packers’ archrival, the Chicago Bears. During the late ’60s, a case
could be made that in Gale Sayers and Dick Butkus the Bears had the
two best players in football. But the team never won its division in those
years, and both Sayers and Butkus went into the Hall of Fame without
ever playing a postseason game.)
By the ’60s writers could speak of coaching as a profession without
flinching. Lombardi with his fundamentals and fire-and-brimstone
personality, and Tom Landry with his multiple schemes and corporate
detachment would stand as the two archetypal figures on the NFL's

stage. Iconoclastic Cowboys wide receiver Pete Gent would recall that at
the beginning of each season's training camp, “Landry would come and
speak, and the first thing he would explain was the history of the
development of his offense and of modern football, and he would cite
the Packers as the perfect example of the opposite of what we did. He'd
talk about the simplicity and execution and talent of the Packers. He'd
say,‘The Packers are this, and we are the opposite end, but we are
willing to give up a few more mistakes, because we're going to beat
them on the big play. Ultimately we will break down and give up things
and we'll have a few turnovers, but we will get better and better as we
execute better and better, as you know the offense more and more, it
can't be stopped.’ ”
Landry understood and respected the philosophies of the Packers’ run
to daylight and the Browns’ option blocking systems, and he built a
defense designed to stop it. “The Flex” was a counterintuitive defensive
system that required defenders, most of whom had spent a lifetime in
football being taught the virtues of absolute pursuit, to instead read a
series of offensive keys. It was confounding to learn, but beautiful in
execution. There was a linking, interdependent quality to the Flex; it was
designed to prevent any big plays and shut down any available holes, or
gaps, as they were known in the trade. As in most revolutionary systems
that depart from the status quo in football, Landry's was aided by an
extraordinary athlete at its center, the quick, explosive Bob Lilly, a
defensive tackle whose physical superiority in the center of the line of
scrimmage caused him to routinely be double-teamed, and occasionally
triple-teamed. With Lilly at the heart of the Flex, and Don Meredith
piloting Landry's multiple offense, the Cowboys were ready to challenge
the Packers, and Landry's influence in the game began to approach
Lombardi's.
In 1966, they were joined at the top of the coaching ranks by a third
man, then in his first season as a head coach, who would eventually
have an influence nearly as extensive as that of Lombardi or Landry, not
so much for his strategic innovation or game-coaching brilliance as for
his all-consuming devotion to the process of the sport.
George Allen was the longtime assistant and heir apparent to George
Halas with the Bears, hired by Dan Reeves in the winter of 1966 to

coach the Los Angeles Rams. After the hiring was announced, a jilted
Halas brought suit, charging Allen with breach of contract. In the
ensuing case, it was revealed that Allen had gone behind Halas's back
and solicited jobs, and had, in fact, contacted the Rams first. The court
found for Halas, who, in a grandiloquent gesture, renounced all rights to
Allen moments after winning the case, and said that after proving his
point, Allen was free to go to the Rams.
But Papa Bear did not easily forget. At the first NFL owners meeting
after the merger, Halas was eager to take up the subject of tampering
with assistants. Standing up at the meeting, he said, “I think you know
what's on my mind.” Turning to Dan Reeves, Halas said, “What Dan
Reeves did to me has been settled between us. We've made our peace.
But as for George Allen— George Allen is a liar! George Allen is a cheat!
George Allen is full of chicanery!” At which point Lombardi turned to
Reeves and whispered loudly, “Dan, it sounds like you've just got
yourself a helluva head coach!”
Not every life has an identifiable transforming moment, an event that
sets a person on the course of his life. George Allen's did. While a
midshipman at Princeton in 1944, he decided he wanted to meet Albert
Einstein. Allen had read that Einstein was an expert checkers player, and
he became obsessed with the idea that he would call on the great man
and challenge him to a game. Bringing along a fellow middie one
Sunday afternoon, Allen in his dress blues knocked on the front door of
Einstein's modest brick home a few blocks off the Princeton campus.
A woman answered and asked the men what they wanted.
“We're midshipmen,” Allen announced, “here to see Mr. Einstein.”
They were invited into the entryway and, after a few minutes, the
sixty-four-year-old Einstein came down the stairs from his study. After
the introductions, Allen explained, “I'd like to play you a game of
checkers.”
At first, Einstein demurred, but Allen was persistent, pleading for a
single game.
“I don't know what you have heard,” said Einstein. “There are many
stories about me. But I don't play much checkers. I don't like it much.”
“Well, I would just like to be able to say I played you one game.”

Reluctantly, Einstein relented, then pointed out, “I do not even keep a
board in my house,” said Einstein. “Did you bring a board with you?”
Allen had not. And with nothing to do but give his thank-you and say
his goodbyes, he turned to leave. Walking back to the campus, he began
an extended, self-lacerating internal dialogue. What haunted him was
not that he hadn't thought of bringing a checkerboard—in fact he'd
considered it strongly and decided against it. Ultimately he had not
brought it, he recalled later, because he thought “it would look a little
odd if I carried a checkers board across the campus to church and into
the neighborhood. I didn't want people to think I was crazy.”
Allen vowed never to make the same mistake again. By the time he
took the Rams job in 1966, he had long ago stopped worrying about
people thinking him crazy.
As devoted to football as any man who had ever coached in the NFL
before him, Allen was a man for whom the common aspects of everyday
life could seem comically distant. Discussing with one writer how he met
his wife, Etty, at Morningside College in 1950, he said, “She was
introduced to me by the head of the speech department at a … what the
heck kind of thing was it, it was a play, a play at the community
theatre.” A year later, he proposed by telegram, with a message that
read, “AS THE 1951 FOOTBALL SEASON APPROACHES I WOULD LIKE
TO HAVE YOU AS MY TEAMMATE.”
Allen had been with the Rams before, as an assistant under Sid
Gillman for one season in 1957. He wasn't invited back. Gillman, a man
of sophisticated tastes and sardonic humor, found Allen to be an
overexuberant lightweight. “Sid just didn't like him,” said Jack Faulkner.
“Didn't think he knew anything about football.” In 1959, Allen landed an
assistant's job under George Halas in Chicago, and immediately latched
on to Clark Shaughnessy, by then back with the Bears as Halas's
defensive coach. Shadowing Shaughnessy for three years, Allen gained a
new and deeper understanding of the game. When he was promoted to
the top defensive job in 1963, his impact was immediate. He became the
architect of the league-leading defense that helped the Bears beat the
Giants in the 1963 NFL title game, and soon became Halas's heir
apparent. But the headstrong Allen was not one to patiently wait in the
wings.

The people who said that Lombardi and Landry were obsessed with
winning were only partly right, missing significant parts of each man's
personality. But on Allen, the charge didn't seem hyperbolic. He was the
logical progression of the coach as “grinder,” dedicated to outwork,
outsweat, outmotivate, and outplan his opposition. The off-season
preparation started by Brown, the late nights obsessing over film study
that began with Gillman, the acute attention to detail popularized by
Lombardi, all came to roost in the personage of George Allen.
On his desk in Long Beach, where the Rams’ coaches moved their
offices to be next to the team's practice facility, there were no family
portraits, no special gifts from his loved ones, only a single sign that
read,“IS WHAT I AM DOING OR ABOUT TO DO GETTING ME CLOSER
TO MY OBJECTIVE—WINNING?” It sat next to a wooden metronome, a
reminder of the steady passing of time. To the Rams players, Allen
declared that the building phase was over. “The future is now,” he told
them, and warned those hoping to make the team, “One hundred
percent isn't enough. You need to give more like 120 percent.”
Dan Reeves was both thrilled and secretly horrified with his new hire.
A month after he took over as head coach of the Rams, Allen boldly
asked Reeves if he could be named general manager as well.“I appreciate
your enthusiasm,” Reeves said, “but George, you're asking for my job.”
In that 1966 season, Allen directed a transformation similar to the one
Lombardi engineered in Green Bay in 1959. But whereas Lombardi
preached simplicity, Allen was determined to take the myriad
contingencies that Shaugh-nessy had mastered and make them accessible
to his players. The defense alone had 300 different alignments and half
as many audibles. Allen preferred experienced players because his
system demanded it; with so much communication and on-field decision
making involved, most rookies couldn't have coped with it. This was also
a portent of future conflict as Reeves, the father of the modern scouting
system in the NFL, began to realize he had hired a strong-willed and
extremely effective coach who had absolutely no use for rookies.
In that first season, the newly purposeful Rams rose to an 8-6 record.
It would be another season before they would challenge the NFL's old
guard in Green Bay or new guard in Dallas, but around the league,
Allen's work ethic had already raised the stakes.

Some of his peers felt he made a bit too much of his dedication. His
closest assistants were convinced that, late at night, he'd take naps in his
office while the projector was running, just to give his staff the idea that
he was still hard at work. Coming in at 8:30 one morning, he was
informed by an aide that Lombardi was on the phone. “Tell him you got
me out of a meeting,” said Allen.

Shortly after the merger was announced, Pete Rozelle appointed a
committee—consisting of himself and three owners from each league
(Tex Schramm, Carroll Rosenbloom, and Dan Reeves from the NFL,
Lamar Hunt, Ralph Wilson, and Billy Sullivan of the AFL)—to meet and
iron out the many details of the coming union. It would take eighteen
full months for the merger agreement to be codified, but in the first six
months, the group was preoccupied with plans for the first game
between the leagues, which would match the AFL and NFL champions in
Los Angeles in January 1967.
As the committee sat around a conference table in the summer of
1966, exchanging ideas about the schedule, Lamar Hunt asked about the
timing of the game. “Should there be a one-week break or two before the
championship game?”
“Wait,” said one of the other committee members, confused about
whether Hunt was talking about the league championship games or the
new world championship.“Which game do you mean?”
“You know,” explained Hunt. “The last game … the final game. The
Super Bowl.”
There were smiles all around, and some chuckles. Hunt had thought of
the name while watching his children playing with one of the hot
novelties of the period, the Wham-O company's high-bouncing Super
Ball. In the weeks ahead, as the group mapped out its plans in a series of
meetings, it began informally distinguishing between league
championship games and the finale by referring to it as the Super Bowl.
“But nobody ever said let's make that the name of the game,” said
Hunt. “Far from it, we all agreed it was far too corny to be the name of
the new title game.”
Hunt sent a letter to Rozelle, dated July 25, 1966, in which he stressed
the need to come up with a title game name. “If possible, I believe we

should ‘coin a phrase’ for the Championship Game…. I have kiddingly
called it the ‘Super Bowl,’ which obviously can be improved upon.”
Rozelle agreed there was room for improvement. He wasn't merely
unen-thusiastic about the term; he actively disliked it. League publicity
director Don Weiss recalled that Rozelle “just didn't like the word
‘super.’ Pete was a pretty regular person, but he was a stickler on words
and grammar, and ‘super’ was not his idea of a good word. He thought
‘super’ was a word like ‘neat’ or ‘gee-whiz.’ It had no sophistication.”
Unable to find a novel or catchy name that they were happy with, the
committee announced that the game would be called “The AFL-NFL
World Championship Game.” Rozelle would have liked to have called
the game “The Pro Bowl,” but, of course, that title was already taken by
the league's postseason All-Star game. When the game had been
speculated about for years, it was often called a “World Series of
football,” which obviously wouldn't work.
Yet even before the season started, Hunt's pet term had taken on its
own momentum. Headline writers, commentators, and players alike
were using the term. And by January 1967 it was becoming clear that it
didn't matter what the leagues tried to call the game, because “Super
Bowl” had already caught on. Networks had taken to referring to the day
of the game as “Super Sunday.” And two weeks later in Los Angeles, on
the morning of the big game, an NFL Films crew member could be heard
giving a sound cue, “Super Bowl, reel one,” before shooting the first reel
of pregame footage at the Coliseum.
There was a curious dichotomy to the advance buildup to the first
contest. So many events in the pantheon of American sports were built
on generations of tradition; the World Series, the Kentucky Derby, the
Indianapolis 500, the Rose Bowl were all more than fifty years old at the
time. Then, suddenly, came the event that promised to be the largest of
them all—the ultimate game in the nation's most popular sport—and it
was the first of those sports events that had been created with the idea
that its primary audience would be watching on television.
Television itself became another battleground. Both CBS's contract
with the NFL and NBC's contract with the AFL called for exclusive

broadcast rights of the league championship game. Thus a compromise
was reached: for the first AFL-NFL championship game, both networks
would broadcast the contest, spending $1 million each for the rights.
They'd each spend another $1 million on promotion. In the first half of
January, both networks devoted more than half of their nighttime
promotional spots to the upcoming game. CBS, which would provide the
video feed of the game, was charging $85,000 per minute of commercial
time, about $10,000 more than NBC. NBC's announcers, Curt Gowdy and
Paul Christman, made appearances on both the Tonight show and the To
d a y show to plug the network's coverage of the game.
The 1966 season thus had a special feel, as both leagues prepared to
send a representative to the first AFL-NFL championship game. In the
NFL, the Packers repeated as champions, but not without an epic
struggle, prevailing 34–27 over the Cowboys in the NFL championship
game in Dallas.
Their opponents, appropriately enough, would be Lamar Hunt's Chiefs,
who had routed the two-time defending AFL champion Buffalo Bills, 31–
7, on a muddy field in Buffalo. The retooled Chiefs were clearly the class
of the AFL, with a fast, oversized defensive front anchored by the
mammoth Buck Buchanan, and a newly potent offense, which found Len
Dawson utilizing splendid second-year flanker Otis Taylor and elusive
rookie running back Mike Garrett.
All that was missing was a real sense of doubt among the public over
the outcome. The AFL had been so belittled for so long that conventional
wisdom held that the game wouldn't be much of a contest. The early
Vegas line installed the Packers as eight-point favorites, and the spread
quickly grew to 13.
Within the leagues themselves there was little but doubt and
uncertainty, and it was this tension—the public and media sense of the
game as anticlimax, combined with each league's view of the game as
the culmination of a seven-year holy war—that would mark the curious
blend of tension and foregone conclusion that characterized the weeks
leading to the first game. For those who followed the game, the contest
possessed an element of the unknown nearly unprecedented in American
sports history. There hadn't been so much as a scrimmage between the
two leagues in the more than seven years of the AFL's existence.

The Chiefs arrived on January 4, eleven days prior to kickoff. Green
Bay arrived four days later, and then only at Rozelle's insistence.
(Lombardi had wanted to fly in January 14, the morning before the
game, just as the Packers would for any other road contest.) What
Lombardi feared was exactly what he encountered: a large media
contingent building up impossible expectations.

In one of the daily interview sessions, Lombardi slowly boiled while a
reporter recited a litany of reasons why the Chiefs couldn't stay on the
same field as the vaunted Packers.
“Thank you,” he said, gritting his teeth after the soliloquy. “That was
nice. But those people on the other side of the field don't realize that the
championship has already been won. This is their chance. For seven
years we've been saying they aren't as good as we are. That's fine. But
suppose they are? How can I convince them in advance that the
championship has already been settled? I think we'd better wait and play
the game, if that's all right with the gentlemen of the press, of course.”
Housing the team in Santa Barbara, ninety minutes from L.A., Lombardi
increased his fines for missing curfew, and pounded into his players the
significance of the game, as a contest that the Packers must win to ratify
all that the National Football League stood for.
The clear storyline heading into the game—the youthful Chiefs’
complex approach against the experienced Packers’ meat-and-potatoes
attack—was largely hijacked by the boisterous antics of the Chiefs’
cornerback Fred “The Hammer” Williamson, who had presented the
media with a braggadocio that owed much more to Muhammad Ali's
playful hazing than Jim Brown's stolid confidence. Williamson
disparaged the Packers’ receivers, predicted the downfall of both Carroll
Dale and Boyd Dowler, and boasted of his trademark “Hammer Tackle,”
a swinging arm chop that he described as “a blow delivered with great
velocity perpendicular to the earth's latitudes.”
While Williamson entertained the media, Rozelle and his staff were
meticulously setting up the game with a solemn, self-conscious
evenhandedness reminiscent of nothing so much as a superpower
summit. Seniority having its privileges, the Packers were designated the
home team, wore their green jerseys, and got the use of the Coliseum's
larger locker rooms. The six-man officiating crew would be divided

equally among NFL and AFL officials, though the lead official, game
referee Norm Schachter, was the NFL's best. When the Packers had the
ball, they'd use the NFL's Wilson game ball (“The Duke”), while the
Chiefs would use the AFL ball, the Spalding JV-5, when they had the
ball. Even the pool of hospitality cars for officials and VIPs was carefully
divided among NFL and CBS sponsor Ford and the NBC/AFL sponsor
Chrysler.
For all that, the days before the affair were decidedly devoid of
grandeur. The event did mark the first formal occasion that would bring
the AFL and NFL owners together for the first time. The Friday night
party, which in later years would take on an operatic lavishness, in the
first year, Rozelle recalled, was “just cold cuts at the Statler Hilton.” He
did give Mickey Herskowitz, one of the AFL staffers brought in to help
with game preparations, a $250,000 budget to entertain the media, with
outings on the Saturday prior to the game to the Santa Anita Racetrack
and Disneyland. Thus began a tradition of feeding and feting the press
with conscientious hospitality and an ever-present open bar. Herskowitz
recalled, “Pete said, when the press left the first world championship
game, he just wanted to hear them saying, ‘Man, this is a lot better than
the World Series.’ ”
Before the pregame introductions, the Chiefs’ Buck Buchanan and
Bobby Bell were so fired up they were crying in the tunnel waiting to
take the field. The Chiefs weren't the only ones who were nervous. Frank
Gifford, by now working as a sideline reporter for CBS, pulled Lombardi
over for a pregame interview. “During the five minutes or so we talked,”
Gifford remembered, “he held on to my arm and he was shaking like a
leaf.”
By the 1:00 p.m. kickoff, the setting was perfect—the Coliseum on a
sunny January Sunday, the grass field all the more resplendent for the
$3,000 spray painting it received on the eve of the game—providing all
the grandeur befitting an epic event. The game would be watched by
more than 65 million people, the largest audience ever to watch a
sporting event in America. Yet attendance was 63,036, leaving more
than 32,000 empty seats; pro fans simply weren't used to traveling to
neutral sites.
Ye t for a half, fans were treated to a surprisingly competitive game.

The Packers scored on their second possession, a six-play, 80-yard drive,
but the Chiefs were moving the ball as well, marching across midfield on
all four of their first-half possessions, as the NFL castoff and AFL star
Dawson was 11-of-15 passing, employing play-action fakes and Stram's
moving pocket to find open passing lanes. Green Bay led, 14–10, at the
half.
The scene at halftime was tense in both locker rooms, as well as the
press box, where the tight score had created a buzz of worry and
excitement. NFL employee Buddy Young said out loud what others were
thinking:“Old age and heat will get the Packers in the second half.” In
the Kansas City dressing room, the Chiefs had the look of a team that
had been hoping it was good enough and had found out that perhaps it
was. “I honestly thought we would come back and win it,” said Stram.
“We felt we were doing the things we had to do, and doing them well.”
In the Packers’ locker room, a peeved Lombardi told assistant coach
Phil Bengston the team needed to get more pressure on the quarterback.
“The coach was concerned,” said defensive end Willie Davis. “But we also
knew we couldn't stand Lombardi if we didn't win. That was always a
motivation for us.”
After Don Chandler's kick to the open the second half was whistled
dead because NBC hadn't come back from a commercial, the second half
began with Chandler's rekick, and the Chiefs took possession. On thirdand-five, Dawson rolled back to pass. The Packers blitzed, a maneuver
that Lombardi had often dismissed as the “weapon of weaklings.” It
worked splendidly in this case, as Dawson's hurried pass sailed short and
was intercepted by Willie Wood, who returned it to the Chiefs’ five.
Green Bay scored on the next play, and again on their next possession,
and the rout was on.
“It was over then,” said the Chiefs’ All-AFL lineman Jim Tyrer. “They
wouldn't respect our run again. Our play fakes were useless. They knew
we had to pass, and they just flew to the quarterback.” Kansas City never
threatened, and by the end, Williamson had been knocked out of the
game, hammered into submission himself trying to tackle the Packers’
Donnie Anderson, whose pumping knee hit Williamson's helmet.
Standing over a prone Williamson, who also broke his arm in the pileup,
the Packers’ Fuzzy Thurston hummed a few bars of “If I Had a Hammer.”

After the game, a relieved Lombardi cradled the game ball. “The
players gave it to me,” he said. “It's the NFL ball. It catches better and
kicks a little better than the AFL ball.”
When asked to assess the Chiefs, Lombardi said, “They've got great
speed.” Pressed further, he added, “I don't think they are as good as the
top teams in the National Football League. They're a good team with fine
speed but I'd have to say NFL football is tougher. Dallas is a better team,
and so are several others.” As silence surrounded him and writers
scribbled furiously in their notebooks, a peeved Lombardi added,“That's
what you've wanted me to say—now I've said it. But I don't want to get
into that kind of comparison.”
It was typical of the mind-set involved in the game that, afterward,
Stram's two sons went to the Packers’ locker room to get Lombardi's
autograph. He patted Henry Stram, Jr., on the head and said,“Tell your
dad his team played a good game.” Stram took the news from his sons
with equanimity, but when notified later of Lombardi's comments to the
press, he was taken aback. “Did Vince really say we weren't that good?”
he asked a group of NFL writers back at the press room in the Chiefs’
hotel. “That we couldn't play at that level? Vince is a friend. Did he
really say that?”
The next morning, when Lombardi walked into an NFL owners
meeting in Los Angeles, he was greeted with a standing ovation.
Heading into the next season, the Packers had a clear prize in mind: no
team in NFL history had won three straight titles, and Lombardi and his
charges would have their second chance to accomplish it. But they were
an aging team, with Hornung retiring after the 1966 season, running
back Jim Taylor taken by New Orleans in the expansion draft, and center
Bill Curry dealt to Baltimore. In the summer leading up to the 1967
season—the Summer of Love, of the Monterey Pop Festival, and
widespread Vietnam protests—the Packers were gearing up with grim
determination for a final stand. Throughout that 1967 season, the
Packers had the look of a great dynasty on its last legs.
The journey to the world championship would require an extra step in
1967. With the addition of the New Orleans Saints, the NFL had grown

to sixteen teams. Rather than two eight-team divisions, the league
realigned into four four-team divisions—Tex Schramm's idea—in a ploy
to create more division races, as well as adding an additional round to
the playoffs.
Green Bay didn't dominate in 1967 as they had in earlier seasons,
winning their division with a modest 9-4-1 mark. The real race occurred
in the Coastal Division, where the Colts and Rams staged a furious run to
the finish, with the two best records in pro football. After a stunning win
in week thirteen over Green Bay (keyed by a blocked punt in the final
minute), the Rams routed Baltimore, 35–10, in the season finale. It was
the Colts’ first loss of the year, but it knocked them out of the playoffs;
both teams finished with 11-1-2 records, with the Rams’ win giving them
the tiebreaker advantage (the two teams had tied in an earlier game).
The Rams then traveled to Milwaukee, intent on toppling the
champions, but the veteran Packers were ready, and manhandled Los
Angeles, 28–7, setting up a rematch with the Dallas Cowboys for the NFL
title.

The details of that NFL championship game, played December 31, 1967,
in Green Bay, would become a part of American sporting legend: the
morning wakeup calls to the Cowboys players, a chipper hotel desk clerk
saying, “Good morning, it's your wakeup call. It's fifteen below zero.”
The realization that Lombardi's pet $80,000 heating system, designed to
keep the field warm in any kind of weather, had seized up and frozen.
“The field was exactly like playing on an ice rink,” said the Cowboys’
Walt Garrison. “Guys would be standing on their feet minding their own
business and they'd shift their feet and the next thing they knew, they
were on their ass.”
The elements got the best of everyone. The officials’ whistles were as
use-less—and as frozen—as the Packers’ heating system. Early on,
Cowboys running back Dan Reeves (no relation to the Rams’ owner of
the same name) took a vicious hit, with his facemask splitting and his
upper teeth jabbing his lip. His face was bruised but it didn't bleed until
several minutes later, when Reeves stood over the heater and warmed up
to the point that blood began to pour out over his uniform.

On the Cowboys’ bench, Garrison turned to Don Perkins and said, “We
must be crazy to be out here playing.”
“We're not crazy,” said Perkins, looking into the stands. “Look behind
you. There's about fifty thousand crazy sonuvabitches up there. They
paid to come out here and freeze to death.”
In the CBS booth overlooking the field, where play-by-play man Ray
Scott carried on with his custom of calling the game with the window
opened, analyst Frank Gifford noted at one point,“I think I'll take
another bite of my coffee.”
At first, the Cowboys seemed too stunned by the conditions to
function. It didn't take the Packers’ secondary long to read one of Bob
Hayes's cues. On Cowboy running plays, the “Fastest Man Alive” lined
up at his split end position with his hands tucked inside his pants. On
pass plays, he pulled them out.
But after falling behind 14–0, the Dallas defense stiffened and turned
the game around in the second quarter when Willie Townes jarred the
ball from Bart Starr. Dallas end George Andrie scooped the fumble up
and returned it for a touchdown. After closing to within 14–10 at the
half, Dallas sprang a halfback option play on the first play of the fourth
quarter, with Dan Reeves hitting Lance Rentzel for a 50-yard scoring
pass to put the Cowboys ahead, 17–14.
Most great football games feature a late drive executed against the
defense and the clock. The Packers faced the elements as well when they
began their final march with 4:54 left on the clock, at their own 32-yard
line. In addition to a Dallas defense that hadn't allowed a score for
almost three quarters, they were fighting the cumulative toll of the
conditions. On the final drive, the Packers’ Gale Gillingham realized he
no longer had any feeling in his hands. Alarmed, he began to slap them
against his hip pads, just to feel a sting in his extremities. Nothing.
A series of delayed screens helped the Packers move across midfield
with Starr passing crisply and his blockers giving him more time. At the
two-minute warning, Green Bay was at the Dallas 39. After two more
passes gained 29 yards, Starr gave the ball to Chuck Mercein on a
fullback delay, again capitalizing on Dallas's relentless pursuit, and he
carried the ball to the three. Anderson picked up two for a first-and-goal

at the one. But after the next two plays netted no yards, and underscored
the difficulty that backs were having gaining the footwork to run, Green
Bay used its final timeout, on third-and-goal, at the one-yard line.
With sixteen seconds remaining, third down, and the Packers out of
timeouts, the obvious choice would have been a rollout option. If Starr
found a man in the end zone, he could throw for the win. If his receivers
were covered he could toss the ball away and stop the clock, meaning
Green Bay would still have a chance for a game-tying field goal on
fourth down. This was, under the circumstances, the only sound call. But
during the timeout, Starr suggested to Lombardi that he could score on a
quarterback sneak, and Lombardi replied, “Run it! And let's get the hell
out of here.”
The call was 31 Wedge, which would call for Starr to take the snap,
spin around, and hand off to Chuck Mercein. Instead, the quarterback
took the ball and kept it himself, charging forward and over the line. On
the line, Ken Bowman and Jerry Kramer double-teamed the Cowboys’
Jethro Pugh, getting underneath his pads and pushing him far enough
off the line to allow Starr to knife through the gap for the winning
touchdown.
It is easy to forget, in the modern age of football, when television
commentators routinely second-guess any gamble that doesn't pay off,
that what made the game's finish so remarkable wasn't just the severity
of the elements or the enormity of the stakes or the history between the
two teams, but the sheer audacity of the final call. Had the Packers not
scored on the play, there almost certainly wouldn't have been time to
bring the field goal unit on for a tying kick, or even to run another play
of any kind. In that event, the Packers would never have won their third
straight title and their coach would have been pilloried for his blunder.
Or, as Pat Summerall put it later, “If they don't score there, then
Lombardi doesn't become Lombardi.”
But they did score, and in so doing, cemented the reputation of the game
as one of the greatest in league history. Inside the locker rooms after it
was over, the players from both sides had the look of men who'd
survived a brush with death. Dallas quarterback Don Meredith—whose

usual irreverence was worn to a flat, somber eloquence—quietly
described the disappointment of getting so close to the title two years in
a row. In the Packers’ locker room, Lombardi brought his team together
and offered nothing but unqualified praise, telling them how proud he
was of their effort. “I can't talk anymore,” he said. “I can't say any
more.” He then led the team in the Lord's Prayer, before opening the
locker room to the media.
But the most discussed comment afterward came from Kramer, whose
memoir of the season would find its climax in the crucial block, and
whose profile had been raised when a CBS camera, planning to pan to
the outside to follow a receiver on a possible pass pattern, couldn't move
because it was frozen to its tripod. In that stationary position, it got a
perfect view of the key block and Starr's score, replayed over and over
again after the game.
“There's a great deal of love for one another on this club,” said Kramer
afterward. “Perhaps we're living in Camelot.” The idea that Camelot was
in Green Bay, Wisconsin, was radical enough. A football player talking
unabashedly about love was also something else altogether.
When Green Bay defeated Oakland, 33–14, two weeks later in the
Super Bowl, it gave Lombardi and his team their third straight
championship, and fifth in seven years. Seventeen days after the Super
Bowl, Lombardi announced that he would retire from head coaching,
though he would continue to run the team as general manager. His
legend was ascendant, and the city of Green Bay had become fabled as a
kind of embodiment of hard work and American resolve.
By the end of the year, Instant Replay: The Green Bay Diary of Jerry
Kramer had become a best-seller, described by the New York Times as
“the best behind-the-scenes glimpse of pro football ever produced.” Its
subtext was a meditation on Lombardi's appeal and power, his hold over
his men. And Kramer would become not just a famous football player,
but something of a fullblown celebrity, invited on talk shows, even
included in Frank Sullivan's annual holiday poem in The New Yorker
magazine (“Hail from the undersigned acclaimer/to the Packers’ rugged
Jerry Kramer”).
With Lombardi's ascension came another round of arguments over his

cultural meaning. Some were talking about him as a possible political
candidate, while others seemed intent on taking him down. Leonard
Shecter's profile in Esquire in January 1968 had been particularly harsh,
implying that Lombardi was a sadist, who in his quest for perfection had
lost much of his humanity.
It would all feed back into the cultural chaos of the time. The
television historian Ron Powers, in describing the electronic landscape of
the ’60s, wrote that “CBS, the dominant carrier of professional football
in the 1960s, was a passive accomplice to another payload of values that
refuted most of the social revolution's aims. As seen on TV in the sixties,
the National Football League leaped quickly from the status of an
arcane, fringe sport to a full-blown expression of America's corporate
and military ethos.”
But it wasn't that simple. While a society was celebrating peace and
love and community, the rising sport of the age did seem to espouse
contradictory impulses of violence and aggression—yet simultaneously it
embodied the same sense of community that fueled the counterculture
movement. The very men that the left criticized for unchecked
aggression and militarism were also those most able to work together
toward a common goal. They were also, in a surprising number of
instances, able to articulate those feelings, as Jerry Kramer's comments
about the power of love in Camelot emphasized. Whether in HaightAshbury or Green Bay, the concept of Camelot was keyed to a sense of
community. And at some level, the game demanded that cooperation. At
a time when so much of the country was being torn asunder, even the
vicarious sense of identification and community must have counted for
something.
“Football requires spartan qualities to be a part of it,” said
Lombardi.“Sac-rifice, self-denial—they're cliché words—but I believe in
them with every fiber of my body. I'm not saying everybody who plays
football is a spartan or denies himself. But it's a symbol of courage; it's a
symbol of teamwork, which I think is a great American attribute.”
By 1968, Lombardi occupied a social realm similar to that of John
Wayne's, though invested with more authenticity. After Lombardi
resigned his coaching duties with the Packers, Robert F. Kennedy,
gearing up for the 1968 Democratic primary, sent him a cable reading,

“Vince, now would you come and be my coach?” Richard Nixon himself
had considered Lombardi a vice presidential candidate, until John
Mitchell, investigating Lombardi's background, found out that the coach
was a law-and-order Democrat, progressive on civil rights and gun
control.

That previous off-season, on February 8, 1967, Lombardi was the
featured speaker at the annual meeting of the American Management
Association in New York City. The Rams’ Jack Teele was in New York for
the Saints’ expansion draft, and recalled Lombardi's presence at the
event. “And here he is—and no matter what we say it was a football
coach talking to millionaires and scions— telling them how to run their
companies. The central theme was to be the boss.”
“Men want to follow,” argued Lombardi to the heads of industry. “It
gives them security to know there is someone who cares enough to chew
them out a little bit or to correct their mistakes.” Lee Iacocca, rising
through the executive ranks at Ford, developed a friendship with and an
admiration for Lombardi. Iacocca would recall that two of Lombardi's
points—to teach his players fundamentals and demand that they play as
a team—were common within the auto industry. What struck the
executive was Lombardi's third tenet: “If you're going to play together as
a team, you've got to care for one another. You've got to love each other.
You can't just go out and say, ‘I'm going to do it alone.’ ”
It was this interdependence, this sense of enlightened cooperation for
a larger cause—among people who might not even like each other off
the field—that would eventually redeem the sport for many who were
bothered by the violence. And for those who had become absorbed by
pro football, that idea was the game's most instructive metaphor.
“Everyone was important in the sweep,” explained tight end Ron
Kramer of the Packers’ signature play. “It's really all of life. We all have
to do things together to make this thing we call America great. If we
don't, we're fucked.”

14

Respect

T

he perception that the NFL was several cuts above the AFL didn't
disappear with the merger. If anything, it intensified. Though the
business war was over, there was still a sense, acutely felt on the part of
those in the NFL and much of the public, that the AFL was at some level
undeserving, more an invention of television than a true competitive
rival of the NFL.
That first Super Bowl left a mark, and forced even those who respected
the AFL to reach unpleasant conclusions about the relative merits of the
two leagues. “It is a good thing it took seven years for the NFL to
consent to the game,” wrote Bud Shrake, Sports Illustrated’s lead AFL
writer, after the first Super Bowl. “If it had been played the first time the
AFL wanted it, the farcical result might have caused the game to be
abandoned forever.”
The AFL's next chance for redemption came in the preseason games
between the two leagues in the summer of 1967, and while a few scores
—like the revenge-minded Chiefs’ 66–24 rout of Chicago—raised some
eyebrows, they didn't really change attitudes, as the NFL won thirteen of
the sixteen contests. Those who argued that the AFL was close to gaining
parity with the NFL had even less to say after the Packers dispatched the
Raiders with ease in the second Super Bowl.
The common belief by 1968 was that the AFL was so inferior, the
ultimate game needed to be reworked. “We started talking in the league
office that, if the game wasn't going to be competitive for several more
years, we'd have to change the format once the merger was completed,”

said Don Weiss, then the NFL's director of publicity.“There was a feeling
that it could be a long time before the AFL could field a competitive
team.”
That mind-set would soon receive a jolt. Though the results in the first
two Super Bowls didn't show it, the American Football League was
coming of age by the late ’60s. Rising from the ashes of the Titans’
ignominy came the glamorous, high-powered Jets, who quickly
assembled under Weeb Ewbank one of the most potent passing attacks in
a pass-dominated league. On the other coast, where Al Davis had
returned to Oakland as general manager, the revived Raiders were a
team molded in Davis's own image, an aggressive club with a gambling
offensive philosophy and an intimidating defense. The Chargers and
Chiefs, noted for high-scoring affairs, were among the most innovative
and physically imposing teams in pro football. And if the coaching
fraternity in the AFL wasn't already distinguished enough—Gillman,
Stram, and Ewbank would all go to the Hall of Fame—the AFL in 1968
featured the return of a coach who already was a member of the Hall,
Paul Brown, who returned as the coach and part owner of the expansion
Cincinnati Bengals.
Not just in style of play but also in its social fabric, the culture of the
new league was distinct from that of the NFL, particularly in race
relations. The AFL was hardly an idealistic utopia of racial equality, but
the topic was more contemplated, more easily confronted, and better
understood than in the NFL.
The new league had been more integrated from the start, and the issue
of racial justice had been explicit since January of 1965 when eighty
AFL players traveled to New Orleans for the AFL All-Star Game. The
twenty-one black players confronted, from the moment they arrived at
the airport and tried to get taxi service, a steady stream of frank,
unrepentant racism. That Saturday, January 9, many of the players were
already in town, but from Bourbon Street to the French Quarter, black
players were denied cab service and entrance into many of the clubs,
and subjected to routine verbal abuse. At one club where the players
were denied entrance, a bouncer pulled a gun on Ernie Ladd. In the
lobby of the Roosevelt Hotel, the Chargers’ Earl Faison heard two locals
discussing him, wondering whether he was Ladd. “No,” concluded one

man, within Faison's earshot. “Ernie Ladd's a bigger nigger than that.
That Ladd is a big nigger.”
The repeated epithets and slights prompted a meeting among black
players, in which they voted to boycott the game. That, in turn,
prompted a hastily assembled meeting with New Orleans civic leaders,
trying to quell the damage. A young black lawyer, Ernest N.“Dutch”
Morial (who would later become New Orleans’ first black mayor), got up
in front of the players and began defending New Orleans’ civil rights
record, arguing that the players were overreacting, and should go ahead
and play the game. Morial, an exceedingly light-skinned AfricanAmerican, proved less than convincing. While he was speaking to the
nonplussed players, the Jets’ Winston Hill leaned over to a teammate
and asked,“Who's this honky?”
A day later, Commissioner Joe Foss announced that the AFL supported
the black players and that the game would be moved to Houston. It
marked one of the first instances of professional athletes working
together to make a social statement, and seemed to foreshadow a more
open discussion of race for many of the teams. The Chiefs’ white
linebacker Jim Lynch recalled how struck he was by the response of his
black teammates in the wake of Martin Luther King's assassination in
April 1968. At the Jets’ training camp that same year, the team's player
association representative, linebacker Larry Grantham, stood up in front
of his teammates during a players-only meeting.“Listen, I'm prejudiced,”
he said. “I know it. I was brought up that way. My grandmother was
brought up that way, my kids, everyone else. I'm hoping to change. I'm
trying to. But as far as being your player rep … I'll represent all of you
the same, no matter what his color is.”
The changed attitudes could be witnessed on the field as well, where
the Chiefs installed Willie Lanier as the pro game's first starting black
middle linebacker in 1968. That same year, Marlin Briscoe earned a
starting quarterback job for the Denver Broncos. In the winter of 1969,
the Raiders made Eldridge Dickey of Tennessee State the first black
quarterback selected in the first round of a pro draft. Later that year, the
rookie quarterback James Harris became the first black to start the pro
season at the position, leading the Buffalo Bills into action. Harris's
experience spoke not just of the distance traveled but the distance

remaining. He had played college football at Grambling, and spent much
of his life in segregated settings. Standing inside his first pro huddle, and
calling the play to be run, it occurred to him that he'd rarely been alone
with this many white people before, much less in a setting in which he
was giving orders.

Into this cultural maelstrom strode the swaggering Joe Namath. By the
1968 season, his fourth in pro football, Namath had become something
more than the biggest celebrity in shoulder pads. He was well on his way
to his aspiration: “to be known as a good quarterback, not just a rich
one.”
Broadway Joe stood out in a way that few football players ever had,
from his facemask, a jaunty, wide double bar with a single vertical
divider, to his feet, where his signature white shoes became an icon
emblematic of not merely an era but a worldview. With a reputation as
sports’ reigning playboy that he was all too happy to cultivate, Namath
had developed a persona undeniably rebellious, yet all the while exuding
an unflappable insouciance consistent with the mystique of the
quarterback. As he explained once in Sports Illustrated, “I don't date so
much as I just, you know, run into something, man.”
Of course, there had been eligible bachelors, even sex symbols, in pro
football before, Jim Brown and Paul Hornung to name two. But Brown
was black, so his personality was filtered through a largely white news
media that was still adjusting to the image of a black athlete who wasn't
“just happy to be here.” Brown's sexual magnetism and his conquests
were little discussed in the media. Hornung's reputation as a ladies’ man
was a subject of asides and subtext, but for all his notoriety, he was an
athlete living in Green Bay. Namath transcended sports, making sports
fans, or at least Namath devotees, of women who previously couldn't
have cared less about sports.
But there was something else at work, too, a level of coolness, and an
assimilation of black social mores. The notion of Hornung as the league's
dominant playboy was not unanimous. As Jim Brown explained in his
autobiography,“To some of the black guys, Paul's sexual rep was funny.
First off, we thought we were the great lovers. With women, with life,
the white guys got all the breaks; as black dudes, we had to be power
smooth. And when we'd watch a white guy who was highly acclaimed as

a lover, they'd often look a little bit square. It was like watching people
dance. Most black guys stay just in back of the beat, no rush. Most white
guys stay just in front of it. They want to get there so fast, they get there
before the beat does. Me and my partners all like Paul. We just thought
he was a little ahead of the beat.”

No one accused Namath of being ahead of the beat. In fact, one of his
signature strengths was the ease with which the All-American who'd
starred for the segregated Alabama team engaged his black teammates.
The sage writer Paul Zimmerman, covering the Jets for the New York
Post in the late ’60s, blanched at Namath's reluctance to talk to the press,
but marveled at his social skills. “I had seen Namath come into a dining
room at training camp, check out the tables and sit down at a table
composed entirely of black players,” Zimmerman once wrote. “Most
teams, no matter how close they are, break down into some loose kind of
black-white arrangement at mealtimes. A couple of black players come
in together and find a table. Then a couple more join them. Before long,
it becomes an all-black table, and the one next to it becomes
predominantly white. To a casual observer, it would give the appearance
of a segregated dining room. But I have seen Namath plunk his tray
down at one of those all-black tables, and then a few white players join
him and soon it becomes a mixed table. I've seen this happen too many
times to assume it's accidental. The same thing on buses. I've seen
Namath integrate a little knot of black players by his presence.”
While players may have been aware of Namath's racial egalitarianism,
and its crucial role in bringing a team together, his persona represented
something entirely different to an older generation, where he seemed to
signify a larger countercultural trend threatening everything sacred in
the culture. (During the season, AFL president Milt Woodward had
suggested that Namath's Fu Manchu mustache was bad for the game's
image, and that he should shave it off. Namath did, but only for $10,000
in a razor commercial.)
But none of this would have mattered much if Namath hadn't proved
himself on the field. In 1967, he became the first quarterback to throw
for more than 4,000 yards in a season. A year later, he led the Jets to
their first division title.
That season's watershed game came November 17, 1968, in Oakland-

Alameda County Coliseum, when the Jets, close to clinching their
division, visited the Raiders, locked in a tight race with Kansas City.
With kickoff at 1:00 p.m. Pacific time and 4:00 p.m. on the East Coast,
the game was NBC's “national doubleheader” game, broadcast
everywhere in the country save the Bay Area, where it was a casualty of
the home blackout. The back-and-forth affair was extremely physical,
and tightly played, and featured a desperate late drive by Namath that
put the Jets ahead, 32–29, with just over a minute to play. There were
still fifty seconds left in the game, the Jets leading, 32–29, with the
Raiders in possession, when the clock struck 7:00 p.m. on the East Coast.
At that instant, the NBC national feed of the game disappeared, just as
the Raiders’ Daryle Lamonica was fading back to pass. After a station
break, tens of millions of fans were next treated to the opening credits of
the made-for-TV movie Heidi, which NBC began as scheduled at 7:00
p.m. Eastern Time.
Two things quickly happened. A blizzard of angry phone calls,
estimated at 10,000 to NBC's headquarters in the first hour alone, blew
out the Circle-7 exchange in the heart of Manhattan. Meanwhile, unseen
by most of the nation, the Raiders quickly scored two touchdowns in 19
seconds of playing time.
The headline in the New York Daily News the next morning said it all:
“Raiders 43, Jets 32, Heidi 14.”
The game turned out to be crucial for other reasons: it helped the
Raiders tie for the Western Division title, and sent them into a divisional
playoff with Kansas City, where they routed the Chiefs, 41–6. Then
Oakland traveled for a third game against the Jets, in the AFL
championship game at Shea Stadium. This time, the Jets rallied to defeat
the Raiders, 27–23, on a cold, windswept afternoon, with Namath
driving the team the length of the field in the last six minutes for the
winning margin. The win sent the Jets to Miami for the third Super Bowl
against the Baltimore Colts, a team that many were already celebrating
as one of the most imposing in NFL history.
After the Colts’ near-miss in 1967, when they suffered their first loss
and missed out on the playoffs on the final day of the regular season,
Don Shula drove his team even harder. When Johnny Unitas tore
ligaments in his right elbow in the last exhibition game, and was

replaced by journeyman Earl Morrall, the Colts didn't miss a beat. With a
wide complement of weapons at his disposal, Morrall passed the Colts to
the league title and won the MVP award. In the 1968 NFL title game, the
13-1 Colts shut out the Cleveland Browns— the only club to beat
Baltimore during the regular season—by a 34-0 score. So smothering
was Baltimore's defense that the Browns never got inside the Colts’ 33yard line.
The Colts were favored by 19 points and the prospect of another
mismatch was so pervasive that, in his press conference the Friday
before the game, Rozelle announced the league would consider altering
the structure of the postseason tournament after the merger in 1970, so
that two NFL teams (presumably more evenly matched) might meet in
the final. The New York Times headline the next day read, “Rozelle
Indicates Tomorrow's Super Bowl Contest Could Be Next to Last.”
But even that news was overshadowed because, from the day he
arrived in Miami, a week before the game, Namath galvanized the media
coverage and became the story, seizing the stage in previously
unthinkable ways. On Monday, he exchanged playful barbs with the
Colts’ Lou Michaels at Jimmy Fazio's nightclub in Miami, and their
banter almost led to a fistfight. The next day, the story of Namath and
Michaels's encounter coursed through the city, and the media contingent
began tailing Namath largely to the exclusion of all else. Joe Falls of the
Detroit Free Press recalled a poolside scene early in the week: “Joe
Namath is trying to read his mail by poolside surrounded by reporters. A
gal in a pink bikini walks by and looks at all the writers. She says, ‘Oh,
poor Joe. They never let poor Joe alone.’ Namath looks up at her. He
doesn't say anything. His eyes say it all. The reporters shift uneasily. One
of them says to Na-math, ‘Hey, Joe, what'd you take at Alabama—basket
weaving?’ Namath looks up again. ‘Naw,’ he says, ‘that was too tough. I
took journalism.’ ”
Namath attended the Miami Touchdown Club dinner Thursday night,
to receive the organization's award as the outstanding professional
football player of 1968. After a couple of drinks, his acceptance speech
was even cheekier than usual. “When we won the AFL championship, a
lot of people thanked the wives,” he noted. “I'd like to thank all the
single girls in New York, they deserve just as much credit. They're

appreciated just as much.” Returning to the standard patter, he said all
the right things about the award not being possible without his
teammates when he heard a voice from the back of the hall shout,
“Namath, we're gonna kick your ass.”

Namath looked out into the dark expanse and said, “Hey, I got news
for you. We're gonna win the game; I guarantee it.” He then made a few
more remarks, sat down, and shortly thereafter ducked out the side door,
for a ride back to the Jets’ headquarters at the Galt Ocean Mile Hotel.
Word of Namath's bold pronouncement spread quickly through Miami.
Guaranteeing victory was nothing new, of course—Muhammad Ali had
been doing it for years—but it was still jarring in the rigid ethical
structure of American team sports. Members of the Colts vowed that
Namath would be in for a lesson. “Football players who are real good
don't have to talk,” said the Colts’ menacing All-League defensive
lineman Bubba Smith. Norm Van Brocklin, by now the head coach in
Atlanta, was even more pointed. “I'll tell you what I think about Namath
on Sunday night, after he has played his first pro football game.” But
Vince Lombardi, for one, saw something. He confided to columnist
Jimmy Cannon the day before the game that “this kid can beat them.”
In the Jets’ locker room moments before kickoff, Ewbank didn't reprise
the “nobody wanted you” pregame oratory with which he'd roused the
Colts a decade earlier. Instead, he was businesslike and matter-of-fact.
“When we win,” he said to his players, “don't carry me off the field. I
have a bad hip. I don't want to get hurt.”
What happened next was a harmonic convergence of elements: the
game's biggest star, from the nation's biggest city, cast as an underdog on
the sport's biggest stage, rising to the occasion and delivering the biggest
upset in pro football history.
From early on, the game had an eerie feel. The mid-afternoon start
found Miami overcast, and the Colts surprisingly tight. Meanwhile,
Namath, the iconoclast, played conservatively and completely within
himself. After dealing with the uneven fronts and stack defensive
alignments of the Chiefs, and the smothering bump-and-run of the
Raiders, the Colts’ conventional strong-side combination zone seemed

nearly remedial to him. He knew what the defense was doing and when,
and he audibled on nearly half the plays in the first half, as the Jets built
a 7–0 lead over a stunned Colts club, whose offense was growing
increasingly frustrated in blowing five first-half scoring opportunities.

In the third quarter, Namath coolly added to the lead, engineering two
drives that resulted in field goals, to make the score 13–0. It was then
that Shula put in Unitas, whose mystique alone was still enough to scare
his former teammate Johnny Sample.“I told my teammates about what
Unitas could do, especially under fire. I knew we'd be in trouble if he
started.” But Unitas's first drive failed and his second ended in an end
zone interception, and by the time Baltimore got the ball again, the Jets
were ahead 16–0. The Colts’ lone touchdown came with 3:19 left, and
after the Jets recovered the ensuing onside kick, the outcome was sealed.
Up in the press box, alongside Halas and Modell, Rozelle watched with
mounting astonishment. With a few minutes left in the game, he headed
down to the field level. Standing under the stands, he spied CBS's Pat
Summerall, who was working the Colts’ sideline for NBC, as a kind of
NFL emissary. Rozelle motioned him over, and Summerall silently stood
by the commissioner for a moment while they both surveyed the
unthinkable. “Tell me,” Rozelle said, taking a long, nervous drag on a
cigarette and preparing for the trophy presentation, “everything you
know about the New York Jets.”
As the clock struck 0:00, Namath engaged in one last iconic gesture.
Running off the field with his jubilant teammates, he lifted his index
finger to the sky and headed for the locker room. The scene inside was
one of ecstatic bedlam, accompanied by a savage, vengeful glee.
Namath, whooping with his teammates, at first rebuffed all questions
from reporters from NFL cities.
Namath would later describe the most satisfying moment of the day as
coming later that night: “And when we got back to the hotel after that
game, I can remember the three guys I saw: Emmitt Thomas and Buck
Buchanan and Willie Lanier, three of the Chiefs. They greeted us as we
got off the bus, and we hugged, and we felt good about it.”
While the Jets and their AFL brethren partied the night away, the
scene at Carroll Rosenbloom's “victory” party was more akin to a wake,

with the host spending much of the party sitting behind a large rubber
plant, disconsolate. Rozelle, adjusting to the shock, had gained a sense of
perspective on the day's events. When one aide, on the verge of tears,
expressed anguish about the implications of the loss, the commissioner
was consoling. “Don't worry,” said Rozelle, “this may be the best thing
that ever happened to the game.”
And in many ways, it was. Just as the Giants’ rise had been crucial to
pro football's burst of popularity in the late ’50s and ’60s, so it was that
having a world champion in New York City further stoked interest
among the advertising and media communities. The Colts players, still in
shock, had constant reminders of the Jets’ upset everywhere they turned.
Colts center Bill Curry remembered being “subjected to the Jets on
television, in commercials, on the printed page, smiling at us, singing,
washing, shaving, eating soup, standing alongside cars, wearing sports
clothes. The most obnoxious by far was the one in which Gerry Philbin
was shown eating Manhandler soup, whatever that was, just stuffing his
face like he was never going to have another meal in his life.” Of course,
each one of those opportunities was a sign of the growth of the sport as a
whole. In that summer prior to the league's fiftieth season, the NFL—
having outgrown the space at Rockefeller Center—moved into larger and
plusher offices at 410 Park Avenue.
But before the anniversary celebration began, the league experienced
one of its most turbulent off-seasons ever, challenging every one of
Rozelle's recognized talents for image management, innovative
leadership, adaptability and consensus building.

For all the successful diplomacy of the merger committee, the owners
headed to the 1969 annual meetings without having solved the biggest
merger-related problem: how to structure the unified league starting in
1970. At the February 1969 meetings, the committee made a
recommendation, supported by Rozelle, to leave things just as they were.
Many felt, after the Jets’ Super Bowl win, that perhaps the AFL identity
would be best retained. Rozelle went so far as to announce, at the
beginning of the meetings, that the 16-10 alignment should stay. When
the recommendation was made at the joint league meeting, though, the

effect was explosive. As Don Weiss recalled, Paul Brown “just about
went berserk.” Brown said that he'd signed to be in the AFL only because
he had been led to believe that there would be a full merger in 1970.
With the NFL possessing teams in each of the top ten television markets,
while the AFL had just one, it was clear that even if TV money was
distributed equally, influence wouldn't be. At the meeting, Brown stood
up, argued a condensed version of his position, then provided a
foreboding warning.“We will find out legally just what our position is
regarding the specific performance clause in the merger agreement.” He
wasn't alone. Al Davis was more attuned than most to the competitive
implications of such a split, and was determined to gain a full merger.
Unable to gain the majority he needed, Rozelle was forced to adjourn
the meeting without a solution, announcing that the new NFL would
indeed be comprised of a thirteen-team National Football Conference
and a thirteenteam American Football Conference, and thus three teams
from the old NFL would have to “go over.”
Suddenly, every team was fair game, though it was considered heresy
to even contemplate a move on the part of the Bears, Giants, Packers, or
Cowboys. And other sides were stiffening. “It would emasculate the NFL
if the Browns were to leave,” said Art Modell, and virtually every NFL
owner felt similarly. When the owners returned for a special meeting at
the league office in early May, Rozelle announced that the owners would
stay there until the decision had been made.
“Oh, hell,” said Rosenbloom. “We're going to be here forever.” It was,
in many ways, a repeat of the standoff in Miami in 1960. As a further
inducement, Rozelle announced that each team that went over would
receive a onetime payment of $3 million, paid by the other NFL owners.
Rosenbloom, convinced that the Colts could start a new rivalry by
getting in the same division with Namath and the Jets, jumped at the
chance. But that was just one of three teams.
Further complicating matters was the illness of Art Modell. Diagnosed
with a bleeding ulcer, he was rushed to Doctors Hospital on East End
Avenue. Later that night, with the stalemate still in place, he was visited
by Wellington Mara and Art and Dan Rooney.
“Gentlemen, I have decided to break this logjam,” said Modell.“I will
move to the American Football Conference if my friend Art Rooney will

come with me, and if I can have the blessing of my dear friend Well.”
Dan Rooney, standing at the foot of the bed, said, “Now just a minute.
There is no way the Pittsburgh Steelers are going to join the American
Football Conference. We have been—”
“Now, Danny,” said Art Rooney, raising his hand gently. “Not so fast.”
Mara smiled at his friends, and mentioned that he thought the Browns
and Giants could keep their rivalry alive with annual preseason games.
And Art Rooney said he'd give it some thought.

At dinner that night, Dan argued his case some more. Near midnight,
they returned to the NFL's Park Avenue offices, where the siege was
continuing. Dan felt that he'd finally succeeded in causing his father to
see things his way. When they got to the twelfth floor, the commotion of
the earlier hours had dissipated to small pockets of activity. The siege
had reached thirty hours, a marathon of negotiating and stalling, and by
that point, owners were sleeping in chairs, on couches. A few owners
who were still awake had raided the liquor stash in Ed Sabol's small
office, which the NFL Films chief used on his trips to New York.
The last clear beehive of activity was in Rozelle's office. Dan Rooney
walked in, and saw the commissioner, still in a shirt and tie, looking
crisp and alert. Rozelle smiled and walked over, handing Dan a small
slip of paper, on which he had written:
CLEV PITT
HOU CINCY
Dan Rooney examined it a moment, and realized that the fight was
already over. And he'd lost.
Rooney handed the slip of paper to his father who asked, “What's
this?”
“That,” said Dan, “is our new division.”
There was no point in even trying to talk Art Rooney out of it now.
The divisional alignment was too appealing. In the retooled AFC, the
Steelers and Browns would go into the AFC Central, where they'd be
reunited with Paul Brown and his Bengals, as well as the Houston Oilers,
whose Astrodome was considered a state-of-the-art showcase facility.

Besides giving both teams an attractive road game in Houston, and the
continuation of their own natural home-and-home series, Rozelle had
created an instantly sizzling twice-a-year rivalry pitting Brown and his
Bengals against Modell and the Browns. It wasn't the old NFL, but under
the circumstances, it was about as appealing a plan as possible. Once
again, Rozelle had fashioned a compromise that appealed to enough
people to carry the day.
In the aftermath, even Paul Brown was complimentary of his old
antagonist. “As for Art Modell's decision to switch, I just feel that it's all
to his credit,” Brown said. “It was his decision that what is best for pro
football is best for everyone.”
Others saw a guiding hand. “Pete was very adept at planting
suggestions,” said Don Weiss. “And I think that was a case where he sort
of got Art to do his bidding.”
With the Central alignment set up, the rest was easy: the Broncos,
Chiefs, Raiders, and Chargers, who had been with one another in the
AFL West for ten years, would stay in the same division in the AFC.
Baltimore would join Boston, Buffalo, the Jets, and Miami in the AFC
East. It would be nearly another year before the NFC owners decided on
the alignment for their new conference. In the spring of 1970, Rozelle
locked up the group again and, when they still couldn't find a solution,
he ordered the five most plausible plans put on separate sheets of paper.
With that, his assistant Thelma Elkjer picked the winning one out of a
vase.
The same 1969 off-season found Joe Namath moving at the center of
the pop cultural universe. With the writer Dick Schaap, he co-wrote his
autobiography, I Can't Wait Until Tomorrow … ’Cause I Get Better-Looking
Every Day. He shot a movie, a motorcycle picture called C.C. and
Company with AnnMargret. Beneath the glitzy surface of movies and
endorsements, it was proving to be a much more difficult off-season. In
March, at the league meetings in Jacksonville, Namath had attended a
meeting with the NFL's director of security Jack Danahy, a disciple of J.
Edgar Hoover, who kept a sign in his office that read, “SECURITY
NEVER SLEEPS.” Danahy informed him that the FBI had been staking
out Namath's restaurant and bar, Bachelors III, for gambling and other
criminal activity. The warnings went unheeded until early June, when

one of Danahy's contacts at the New York police department advised him
that a raid on Bachelors III was imminent. At that point, Rozelle
summoned Namath to a meeting and warned that he should divest
himself of his business stake in the restaurant or face suspension. It was
a bold, risky move on Rozelle's part, since Namath himself had been
accused of no wrongdoing.

On June 6, at a bizarre morning press conference at Bachelors III, a
tearful Namath announced his retirement from football. “I'm not selling,”
he said. “I quit. They said I'm innocent, but I have to sell. I can't go along
with that. It's principle.” The event prompted one of Sports Illustrated’s
most memorable covers (“Namath Weeps”) and a storm of reaction.
When President Richard Nixon heard the news in the White House, he
proclaimed “Good riddance!” NBC was in the midst of negotiating with
advertisers for the 1969 season and, upon news of Namath's retirement,
two of its largest sponsors pulled out immediately.
After Namath went off to Los Angeles for more shooting on his film, it
was left to Rozelle to devise some strategy that would convince Namath
to give up the restaurant and get him back in football. By then, though,
Rozelle had some doubt whether Namath even wanted to play. He had
been privy to a report alleging that, earlier in the spring, Namath had
approached the Jets’ surgeon, Dr. James Nicholas, with a bribe for
Nicholas to declare him physically unfit to play the 1969 season, and
that after Nicholas refused to cooperate, the two men exchanged heated
words. (Nicholas would later deny that any such offer took place. “Joe
was a close friend of mine,” Nicholas said. “The report is wrong; he did
nothing of the sort.”)
On June 26, Namath was back in New York, for a private meeting at
Rozelle's apartment in Sutton Place. Rozelle's daughter, Anne, like most
tenyear-old girls in the city, was madly in love with Broadway Joe.
Rozelle patiently explained to her beforehand that, while she would be
able to meet Na-math at another time, this meeting was not the
appropriate occasion. After reluctantly promising that she'd stay in her
room during the meeting, Anne burst into the living room just after she
heard the doorbell ring, ran up to Na-math, and jumped in his arms,
before blurting, “I just want you to know that even if my daddy hates
you, I still love you.” With that as the icebreaker, Na-math and Pete

Rozelle both broke out laughing, and Anne was sent back to her room.
At the meeting, Rozelle made it clear to Namath that the league
wanted him back. (Rozelle's list of talking points included the notation,
“no one picking on namath. personally like him. want him in football—biggest
name we have.”) While nothing was settled that day, the two sides agreed
to meet again during Namath's next break in filming. They met twice on
Monday, July 14, and that week Namath decided to accept the facesaving terms of the league's compromise offer, which still required
Namath to sell his stake in the restaurant, and not enter Bachelors III for
the foreseeable future, but consented to allow him to invest in other
Bachelors III franchises elsewhere in the country. On Friday, July 18, in
a quickly arranged press conference, a beaming Rozelle announced, “Joe
and I and professional football have gone through six weeks of
considerable unpleasantness and I am very happy to announce that our
problem is resolved.”
This was Rozelle at his absolute best. Defusing an explosive situation,
assuaging egos and—significantly—getting his way. Rozelle had
preserved the league's reputation for toughness against gambling and,
perhaps as importantly, preserved the reputation of Namath as a
principled star who wanted nothing more than to play football.
As a guest on The Mike Douglas Show later that fall, Rozelle was asked
what he wanted for his sport. “Oh, I guess I would like it, obviously, to
have total integrity, and the confidence of the public,” he answered. “I'd
like it to be exciting, modern, ‘with-it.’ It has violence, certainly … but I
think it's really more action.” In the midst of all the crosstalk—Edith Piaf
asking about sex the night before a game, another guest remarking upon
Dick Butkus grunting at the line of scrimmage—Rozelle was never
defensive, always self-effacing, and always quick to clarify the league's
position. In sum, he was mastering a public relations art that had yet to
be formally defined. Pete Rozelle was making sure the NFL stayed on
message.
By the summer of 1969, pro football had baseball surrounded. In the
persona of Lombardi, the Silent Majority on the right found a voice that
exuded traditional authority in the face of cultural upheaval. And in the
slangy, beatnik irreverence of Namath, the counterculture had its very
own football star. In bars and living rooms, the game had surpassed

baseball in popularity among mainstream sports fans. And
simultaneously, “the sport of the ’60s” had captured the devotion and
imagination of the elite. “Football is not only the most popular sport, it
is the most intellectual one,” wrote William Phillips in the journal
Commentary in 1969. “It is in fact, the intellectuals’ secret vice…. Much
of its popularity is due to the fact that it makes respectable the most
primitive feelings about violence, patriotism, manhood.”
The game's universe was expanding, but something else was
happening as well. Within the smaller circle of avid sports fans, pro
football wasn't merely growing but muscling its way to primacy, at
baseball's expense. This was more than just a generational shift,
signaling younger adults raised on football replacing a generation that
had grown up listening to baseball on the crystal set. It showed that the
NFL was reaching a vast, upwardly mobile middle class, and changing
their loyalties.
Conversely, the Grand Old Game of baseball—plagued in 1968 by a
historic offensive drought and slumping attendance—for the first time
seemed to have become passé, quaint, an anachronism representative of
little more than nostalgia for an earlier, simpler time. This was a gross
oversimplification, of course, but the truth remained that while football
soared, baseball floundered, prisoner to its own complacence.
“Up until now, baseball has been sacrosanct, more American than
honest Abe, more Catholic than the Pope,” said John Steadman of the
Baltimore News-American in the early ’70s.“So when, under Pete Rozelle,
the NFL began to advertise itself as the new religion, baseball was totally
unprepared to respond. They were like a punch-drunk fighter being
belted around the ring. And everything the NFL did—either frontally or
subliminally—was designed to disparage baseball, to get this message
across: ‘Hey, they're out of it. We're the ones who're relevant, the wave
of the future, who have a sort of new culture sense of style.’ ”
This perception was shared by some within the game as well.
“Baseball has become dull, not just slowed down, but dull,” complained
Bill Veeck. “The owners recognize their failures and the loss in prestige
to pro football. They're being murdered, but many won't admit it. They
won't admit it because they don't know what to do about it.”

In a Sports Illustrated article in 1967, Roone Arledge was even more
pointed, writing, “Baseball is a game that was designed to be played on a
Sunday afternoon at Wrigley Field in the 1920s, not on a 21-inch screen.
It is a game of sporadic action interspersed with long lulls. Last year we
tried rerunning plays in slow motion. It was redundant.”

Both sports were still popular, but only football seemed relevant to the
chaos enveloping the society. Football wasn't war, in a pure sense, but it
was war in almost every metaphorical sense—gladiators in hand-to-hand
combat, generals worrying over strategic battle plans, two communities
sending forth their youngest and strongest representatives to settle ageold scores. Johnny Unitas called it “the closest thing there is to all-out
war.”
The most vivid and lasting critique of the war imagery in football
came from the comedian George Carlin, who in the late ’60s was still
establishing himself as a biting, trenchant voice of subversive wit. His
classic routine “Baseball and Football” examined the stark contrasts in
the language of the two sports. “Baseball is a nineteenth-century pastoral
game,” Carlin noted. “Football is a twentieth-century technological
struggle. Baseball is played on a diamond, in a park. The baseball park!
Football is played on a gridiron, in a stadium, sometimes called Soldier
Field or War Memorial Stadium. Baseball begins in the spring, the season
of new life. Football begins in the fall, when everything is dying.”
Being in tune with the chaotic times was a double-edged sword. As
criticism of the war in Vietnam grew, so, too, would criticism of the
institution and culture of pro football.
“I have found myself much less at ease with the violence of football
than ever before,” wrote longtime fan George Plimpton during his
second experience with participatory journalism, in training camp with
the Baltimore Colts in 1971. “The general temper of the times—the war
in Indochina and the vast unrest, tipping over into brutality and rage—is
itself so violent that it is impossible to accept the metaphor of football,
and its popularity, without wondering whether it reflects some of the
country's excesses.”
The perception at the time held that pro football's audience was made
up largely of the earnest mainstream determined to see the good in the

country. They were Nixon's Silent Majority, the people who made Barry
Sadler's “The Ballad of the Green Berets” a number one pop single in the
heart of the Vietnam War. And those Americans were brought together
by pro football. That much was certainly true. But it wasn't the whole
truth.

Nowhere was pro football's rise more apparent or obvious than at the
White House, where the nation's commander in chief, Richard Nixon,
stood as the country's First Fan, a football zealot who followed the game
with a rapt attention that delighted his admirers and appalled critics.
Nixon's devotion to the game was at a different order of magnitude
than that of his predecessors. Along the campaign trail, he was fond of
joking that he was “not heavy enough to play the line, not fast enough to
play halfback, and not smart enough to be quarterback.” Moving to New
York City to practice law in 1963, Nixon grew even more enthralled with
professional football, traveling regularly to Yankee Stadium to watch the
Giants and frequently stopping by parties thrown by the Giants players.
Upon accepting the Republican Party's nomination at the 1968
convention, Nixon made public his gratitude to his mother, his father,
and his football coach.
ABC's producer Roone Arledge would remember the leader of the free
world dropping in on ABC's broadcast of the Hall of Fame Game, in the
1971 preseason, and waiting outside the booth prior to a brief on-air
chat with Frank Gifford. “You know, when Frank Gifford was playing
with the Giants, I used to go to a lot of their games,” Nixon told Arledge.
“And, after the games, Frank would have cocktail parties at his
apartment, which was right near the stadium. I used to go there quite a
bit. I was invited many times. I know Frank Gifford; I'm sure he'll
remember me.”
Another former football player, Senator Eugene McCarthy of
Minnesota, seized the football for liberals. During the 1968 primary
campaign, he made the point that “Politics is like coaching football. You
have to be smart enough to understand the game and dumb enough to
think it's important.” Elsewhere on the left, fans included members of
the Black Panthers, who often frequented a bar owned by the Raiders’
Gene Upshaw, and the dissident Abbie Hoffman, who was dismissive of
football's left-wing critics. “They're a bunch of peacenik creeps,” he said.

“Watching a football game on television, in color, is fantastic.”
Pro football's appeal had simply become too broad to be easily
categorized. In the early ’70s, when Clint Murchison's son Robert was
attending Dartmouth, the school changed its nickname from Indians to
Big Green. The younger Murchison, seeing the grief his university took
over its old nickname, had an idea. His father's barber in Dallas was a
full-blooded Cherokee who was related to Russell Means, the leader of
the American Indian Movement. Wouldn't it be fun, suggested Robert, if
the Murchisons offered to help Means and his followers stage a protest
against the Washington Redskins, over the racial insensitivity of their
nickname? Envisioning the picket signs outside of RFK Stadium,
Murchison embraced the idea, and eagerly asked his barber to contact
Means. And that's where the plan died. It turned out that Russell Means
was a rabid football fan. And his favorite team was the Washington
Redskins.
Nixon's closest friend in football was George Allen, the Los Angeles Rams
coach who in the late ’60s reawakened the city's love affair with its
football team. Their connection was largely coincidental—Allen had
been a coach at Whittier in the late ’50s, and first met Nixon then. But
they stayed in touch and even on the campaign trail in 1968, Nixon kept
close tabs on Allen and his team.
The newest incarnation of the Rams certainly had glamour. As one of
the most celebrated defenses in the game, their formidable front four
was dubbed the “Fearsome Foursome,” and the Rams’ handsome,
strapping quarterback Roman Gabriel, a part-time actor, was billed as
the West Coast's answer to Joe Namath (though the parallel only went so
far; Gabriel was married). Most game days in L.A., Jennifer Allen would
remember the family eventually winding up at Matteo's bar, where,
“after home victories, Dean Martin would greet us with cigarettes and
martini in hand…. He'd tell my father, ‘Great game, George,’ then want
to discuss Dad's reason for calling a draw play on third-and-long.”
Starting with the tenth game of Allen's rookie season in 1966, the
Rams lost just five of their next forty-four regular season games. It
should have been a triumphant time for Dan Reeves, but the owner had

never connected with his new coach. Reeves was perplexed by Allen's
apparently joyless grasping of victory for victory's sake, and the two men
grew alienated. Allen had moved the coaching offices out of the Rams’
offices on Beverly Boulevard, often didn't return Reeves's calls, and had
been known to fabricate stories about the owner's indifference to
motivate his team.

“Dan Reeves was this very sophisticated, erudite man,” said Allen's
wife, Etty. “Dan loved wordplay and he loved to share a drink with
friends and talk about the game. As for my husband, well, George drank
milk, ate ice cream, and just started working on the next game. He was
not the sort to relax over cocktails.”
Upon firing Allen at the end of the 1968 season, Reeves said,“I had
less fun winning with George Allen than I did losing with other
coaches.” But after a threatened player revolt forced Reeves to
reconsider, Allen was reinstated as head coach.
After rallying round their once and future coach, the Rams were a
confident team heading into the 1969 preseason, and Nixon left his
retreat in San Clemente to attend not one but two of the Rams’
preseason games. The Rams won their first 11 games of the 1969 season,
becoming the dominant story of the season. But after clinching their
division, they lost their last three regular season games, then squandered
a 17–7 halftime lead on the road at Minnesota, as Joe Kapp and the
Vikings rallied for a 23–20 win. After the loss, a devastated Allen was
almost speechless. “I can't believe it,” said Allen. “I just can't believe it.
We knew we had to win.”
Whatever effect it had in the society at large, Lombardi's “winning is
the only thing” maxim was widely shared in pro football. A single play
here or there changed not only the score of a big game, but the
perception of everything that went before it. The Rams went to Miami to
play Dallas (a team with its own stigma, perpetually branded as “Next
Year's Champions”) in the Playoff Bowl, an increasingly unpopular
consolation game between conference runners-up. “You're playing for
third place in the NFL,” Roman Gabriel said, “which is like playing for
third place in a war. There isn't any such thing. There are winners and
losers, but nobody comes in third.”

The Kansas City Chiefs knew all about such labels. Heading into the
final AFL season in 1969, the Chiefs were a team with a reputation to
salvage and scores to settle. For years, Joe Namath and many scouts felt
that Hank Stram's team had the best talent in the league. But, for
whatever reason, the franchise had made the postseason only twice,
winning the AFL championship in 1962 and 1966. Still stung from their
humiliating season-ending 41–6 playoff loss to the Raiders in 1968, they
entered the 1969 season with a sense of purpose verging on a crusade.
That summer, at the height of the mod hairstyles, Hank Stram sent a
letter to the team informing them that in the season ahead, the Chiefs
would allow no long hair falling below the bottom of the helmet, no
mustaches, goatees, or sideburns longer than his own. Stram had been
the most fashion-conscious coach in the pros for years, and the Chiefs
reflected his tastes, not merely in the variety of formations they used but
in countless details of their public appearance. When traveling for a road
game, the Chiefs wore tailor-made black blazers and gray slacks, white
shirts and black ties, with the team's logo on the breast of the jacket. In
1968, the Chiefs began wearing fire-engine-red game pants on the road.
The team's offensive huddle formed in a choir alignment, with the five
interior linemen standing in the back row, backs to the line of
scrimmage, mirroring the positions they would take at the line, the three
receivers and two running backs standing in the front row, bending at
the waist, all facing the quarterback. In these, and numerous other ways
(including the manner in which they lined up for the national anthem, in
numerical order), the Chiefs exuded a kind of crisp, self-conscious sense
of style that was, in both its precision and its vanity, a perfect reflection
of their head coach.
At a racially polarized time, the Chiefs were also noteworthy for being
an integrated team that blended well together on and off the field.
Through the move to Kansas City and the disappointment of Super Bowl
I, the Chiefs had developed a slangy, unforced camaraderie, with the
good ol’ boys from the South mixing freely with the wide assortment of
Southern blacks. Willie Lanier and Jim Lynch roomed together on the
road, and most of the team spent their off-seasons in Kansas City, many
playing on the Chiefs’ barnstorming basketball team. Players of both
races often mocked the dictatorial ways of Stram, whom some referred

to as “Little Caesar,” but to a man, they viewed their coach as utterly
without prejudice. “There were some people who thought he put form
over substance,” said one player, “but it was clear, when it came to race,
he didn't care about color, he only cared if you could play.”

The team would need all the cohesion and support it could muster.
After posting a 6-0 preseason record, Kansas City jumped to two easy
wins on the road, over the Chargers and Patriots, to start the regular
season. But in the second game Len Dawson went down with a small tear
in the left knee ligament. The team sought opinions from six different
specialists before they found one who recommended rest and
rehabilitation, rather than season-ending surgery for Dawson. After six
weeks of rest and rehabilitation, Dawson returned to rally the Chiefs to a
win over Buffalo November 2. Two weeks later, he led the club into Shea
Stadium just two days after the death of his father, and threw three
touchdown passes to Otis Taylor in a 34–16 win, before flying to Ohio
for the funeral. The Chiefs would lose twice in the last month to the
Raiders, but would benefit from the AFL's expanded playoff format, in
which the second-place team from each division would qualify to play
the champion of the opposite division in the first round of the playoffs.
Kansas City headed to New York, for a rematch with the defending
world champion Jets, winners of the AFL East. The tightly fought game
was tied at 6 in the fourth quarter when Otis Taylor spoke with Dawson
on the Chiefs’ sidelines. As a onetime college quarterback, Taylor had a
nuanced understanding of defensive coverages. Kansas City had given
the Jets some trouble with its “camouflage slot” formation, in which
Taylor lined up a few yards behind the line of scrimmage, between an
enlarged gap between the right guard and tackle. He'd seen enough of
how the Jets adapted to the formation to be convinced that if he ran a
crossing pattern out of the alignment, he'd be singlecovered by a strong
safety who couldn't hope to keep up with him. As the Chiefs took the
field following Turner's kick, Taylor sidled up to Dawson and asked
excitedly,“Are you going to call it?”“Not until we get in the huddle,”
said Dawson.“I want everybody else to hear it.”
The play developed exactly as Taylor had envisioned, yielding a 61yard gain that devastated the Jets. On the next play, from the New York
19, Dawson found Gloster Richardson for the go-ahead touchdown, and

Kansas City took a 13–6 lead. The Kansas City defense repelled two more
drives, concluding the last with a Jim Marsalis interception in the end
zone. The champion Jets were vanquished, and the jubilant Chiefs began
looking toward a third game with Oakland, two weeks hence, in what
would be the final game ever between two American Football League
teams.

That game would serve as a fitting end to the league's self-contained
history. The Raiders had the league's most valuable player, Daryle
Lamonica; Coach of the Year, the first-year firebrand John Madden; and
most potent offense, as well as a sizable home field advantage and the
knowledge that they'd beaten the Chiefs in seven of their eight previous
meetings.
It would be the sort of game that many of the participants would
describe later as “a war.” Johnny Robinson cracked two ribs on a play,
Jim Marsalis left the game with a bruised kidney. Jim Lynch made one
tackle with such force that he broke his belt. Daryle Lamonica tore
tendons in his hand following through on a pass, his fingers tangling in
the facemask of the Chiefs’ onrushing Aaron Brown.
Oakland dominated the first half, but Kansas City fought back to tie
the game at 7 late in the second quarter. The Raiders spent much of the
third quarter in Kansas City territory as well, but couldn't convert. After
Emmitt Thomas ran an end zone interception out to the six, the Chiefs
found themselves pinned back deep in their own territory again, facing
third-and-14 at their own two-yard-line. Avoiding the rush, Dawson
scrambled and threw a high floater from his end zone toward Otis
Taylor, who made a spectacular over-the-shoulder catch while
tightroping along the sidelines against double coverage at the 35-yard
line. The Chiefs proceeded to march down the field for a touchdown, to
go up 14–7 with 3:24 left in the third quarter.
“The Chiefs would be open and flamboyant when they got ahead, but
they tended to be a little conservative when the game was tighter and
they were behind,” said Madden. “So that was a hell of a call, and a hell
of a throw by Len Dawson. Because that could have turned the game
around the other way. That's a dangerous place to throw. Then Otis
makes a heck of a catch on the sideline. If we knock that thing down, if
we pick it off, we win the game.”

Instead, the Chiefs persevered, and held on, overcoming three fourthquarter turnovers to do so. After consecutive road wins over the
defending world champions and the team with the best record in pro
football, with a stifling defense that allowed just 13 points in those two
games, Kansas City might have been regarded as a formidable contender.
Instead, much was made of the fact that the team hadn't even won its
own division. The gritty Minnesota Vikings were installed as a 13-point
favorite by Jimmy “The Greek” Snyder. One headline in Pro Football
Weekly, the newspaper that had begun publishing two years earlier and
had found a rabid audience of professional fans and gamblers, noted, “If
It's a Battle of the QBs … Kapp Has It All Over Dawson.” The New York
Times’s William Wallace predicted a 31–7 Vikings win. So the buildup to
Super Bowl IV played out in eerie parallel to the previous year, with a
seemingly invincible team from the NFL being put forth as prohibitive
favorite, the merits of the AFL entry largely ignored in the calculation.
“They're doing it again,” warned the Raiders’ George Blanda during
the week. “They haven't learned a thing since last year. They're
underestimating the AFL all over again.”
And once again, all the attention leading up to the game centered on
the AFL quarterback at the eye of a media hurricane. This time, though,
Len Dawson did nothing to bring it on himself.
The Chiefs were spending their first full day in unseasonably cold New
Orleans on Tuesday afternoon, January 6, when NBC's Huntley-Brinkley
Report broke a story linking Dawson and five other pro players to a
Justice Department sting of a network of bookmakers, including Detroit
bookie Donald “Dice” Dawson (no relation to the quarterback), whose
address book included phone numbers of Len Dawson and Namath.
Seven years after the Hornung and Karras suspensions, and just
months following the protracted standoff over Namath's involvement in
Bachelors III, the report ignited a media frenzy beyond anything seen the
year before in Miami. Rozelle was on a boat in Bimini when the news
hit, and could do little but release a statement from the league office
that evening, noting that the league had “no evidence to even consider
disciplinary action against any of those publicly named.” But hundreds
of writers and reporters were already gathered in New Orleans,
confronting a potentially major story with absolutely no answers.

With the media staking out the Fontainebleau Hotel, where the Chiefs
were staying, it was left to Stram, Dawson, and Chiefs publicist Jim
Schaaf to work out a response. Late that evening, Dawson called a press
conference to make a statement. “I have known Mr. [Donald] Dawson
for about 10 years,” he said, “and I have talked to him on several
occasions. My only conversations with him in recent years concerned my
knee injury and the death of my father. On these occasions he called me
to offer his sympathy. These calls were among the many I received.
Gentlemen, this is all I have to say. I have told you everything I know.”
Ultimately, that's all there was to the story. Neither Dawson nor the
other players were ever subpoenaed, and all were cleared of any
wrongdoing. Rozelle arrived in New Orleans on Wednesday, and coolly
conducted an hour-long press conference in which he defended Dawson's
honor as well as the league's security investigation. But the furor didn't
immediately go away, and Len Dawson was left to face the biggest game
of his life under a cloud of suspicion.
“He never had a tougher week in his life,” said roommate Johnny
Robinson. “It ate him up. From the day it all started, up to game time, he
looked like he aged five years…. I don't think he got three hours of sleep
the night before the game.”
For his part, Robinson had spent much of the week in physical therapy
with severely bruised ribs. Showing up the night before the game, he
went to Emmitt Thomas's hotel room and, with secondary mates Jim
Kearney and James Marsalis, watched films of the Vikings’ offense.“It
wasn't any big secret,” said Robinson of the Vikings’ approach. “They
beat everybody they played doing the same thing. They weren't going to
trick anybody—I don't think they wanted to trick anybody. It was, ‘Here's
what we're gonna do. We're not gonna run a halfback reverse pass when
we can just kick your teeth in.’ ”
The day of the game dawned cold and overcast, with rain pelting New
Orleans in the morning and a tornado warning in the area early in the
afternoon. In the locker room prior to the game, the Chiefs were
confident and keyed up, but not, in center E. J. Holub's description, the
“blithering idiots” they were prior to Super Bowl I. The Chiefs arrived in
their locker room to find a small addition to each jersey, an anniversary
patch denoting the ten-year history of the AFL. “It was incredible to see

the reaction of those great players,” said Hank Stram.“They were so
proud to wear that patch because they cared about the league. They
wanted to be first-class.”
When the game began, it quickly became clear that while the Vikes’
undersized 235-pound center Mick Tingelhoff may have been a worthy
All-League selection in the NFL, where he was a quick-footed blocker
free to operate in space, he was physically unequipped to deal with the
head-on pressure and intimidation of 6-foot-7, 285-pound Buck
Buchanan or 6-foot-1, 265-pound Curley Culp, who alternated lining up
right on Tingelhoff's nose in the Chiefs’ odd-man fronts, largely
destroying the Vikings’ interior running game. Confused by the Chiefs’
triple stack and intimidated by Buchanan's and Culp's alternate mauling
of the outmanned Mick Tingelhoff at center, the Vikings were shut out in
the first half. To say the Vikings ran a vanilla offense is to give them
credit for more flavor than they mustered. In sixty-two offensive plays
from scrimmage, they didn't once shift or start a play with a man into
motion.
“Our whole influence was Bambi and the Chargers and the things Sid
Gill-man was doing, like the Raiders, and the Jets, when you got an arm
like Namath; that was our culture,” said the Chiefs’ Jim Lynch. “The NFL
was different. Their culture was the Green Bay Packers, Theirs was,
‘Look, we're gonna line up and we're gonna run the Green Bay sweep.
And you'd better stop us, ’cause here we come.’ ”
On offense, the Chiefs double-teamed the Vikings’ ends, to prevent
them from batting down passes, and in so doing opened passing lanes for
Dawson's play-action fakes and short, crisp flares and out patterns.
Kansas City drove consistently on the Vikings in the first half, building a
9–0 lead on three Stenerud field goals (the first one from 48 yards out).
When the Vikings’ Charlie West fumbled Stenerud's kickoff following the
third field goal, the Chiefs’ Remi Prudhomme recovered on Minnesota's
19, and three plays later, Mike Garrett scored from five yards out, and
the Chiefs went to the half leading 16–0.
The Vikings had trailed the Rams by 10 at the half and came back to
win that playoff game. But during the interminable halftime, while the
Tulane Stadium crowd was being treated to a reenactment of the Battle
of New Orleans that further tore up the spongy field, Vikings coach

Grant apparently did nothing to adjust to the Chiefs’ tactics, merely
advising his team to play better. For a while they did, mounting their
one sustained drive of the day, to slice the lead to 16–7.
On the next drive, with a first-and-10 at the Minnesota 46, Dawson
sensed an all-out blitz and, after a short drop, flung the ball out into the
flat just as he was being hit. The pass found Otis Taylor, running a quick
hitch pattern, and Taylor did the rest. He broke the attempted tackle of
cornerback Earsell Mack-bee and sprinted down the sidelines in his long,
prancing stride. Karl Kassulke had an angle on him at the 10, but
Taylor's juke move and stiff arm left Kassulke on the ground. Suddenly,
the Chiefs were up 23–7, and the game was all but over.
Kansas City picked off three passes in the fourth quarter (giving them
10 interceptions in three playoff games), and Aaron Brown's tackle of the
previously indomitable Kapp sent the Vikings’ leader to the sideline,
writhing in pain. Minutes later, as the chilled New Orleans twilight
subsumed what little sunlight had peeked through the densely packed
clouds, the red-clad Kansas City Chiefs ran off the field, carrying Hank
Stram on their shoulders, champions of the world. In the frantic locker
room at Tulane Stadium, a crush of reporters came in to document the
chaotic scene, along with dozens of AFL players and coaches.
Pete Rozelle presented Lamar Hunt and Hank Stram with the Super
Bowl championship trophy, as Chiefs scout Lloyd Wells sat grinning in a
window well against the back wall, the spot where he was sure to be in
virtually every television picture of the championship podium.
Redemption was all around the room. “I knew I went with the right
team!” said Bobby Bell, who had chosen the Chiefs over the Vikings back
in 1962. Taylor, who'd made the key offensive play in all three playoff
games, spent the first fifteen minutes after the game weeping tears of
joy.
Dawson, vindicated both off and on the field, received the MVP award
with the same outward calm he'd exhibited all week. Then came the
summons from Chiefs equipment man Bobby Yarborough.
“Hey, Lenny, come here,” said Yarborough. “The phone—it's the
president.”
“The president of what?” asked Dawson.

“The president,” exclaimed Yarborough. “Nixon!”
The short conversation that ensued was a seminal moment in
American sports, and spawned countless congratulatory calls and White
House visits in the decades to follow. It wasn't even the first time Nixon
had called the Chiefs that day. He'd rung up Stram that morning at the
Fontainebleau, to tell him that he knew Dawson hadn't done anything
wrong, and wished the team luck in its game that day. “I don't know if it
amounted to a presidential pardon,” said Stram. “But it sure made
Leonard feel better.”
And so the original Super Bowl series, NFL vs. AFL, ended in a 2–2 tie,
and parity between the leagues that would come together the following
season.
“Most people in the NFL thought that the Jets’ win in Super Bowl III
was a once-in-a-lifetime upset,” said Steve Sabol of NFL Films.“It didn't
really cause people to change their opinion. Everyone said, if they
played ten times, the Colts would win eight or nine times. But after
Super Bowl IV, nobody was saying that. After that, there was no doubt
anymore—you had to grant that the AFL had reached parity. At the
least.”
Weeb Ewbank worked his way through the room, congratulating and
embracing players, finally getting to where Hank Stram was standing.
Ewbank gave Stram a hug, and the two coaches briefly congratulated
each other on the mutual accomplishment. And both must have silently
noted the irony: on the afternoon of January 11, 1970, the American
Football League had finally earned the lasting respect it deserved. At
that very same moment it ceased to exist.
In ten years the AFL had irreversibly altered the American sports
landscape by sparking a rush to expansion that would eventually seize
all sports. Major League Baseball began the decade with sixteen teams
and ended with twenty-four, the National Hockey League doubled in size
from six to twelve, and both the NHL and NBA would soon be
challenged by rival leagues.
The AFL opened numerous new markets, in Kansas City and Denver,
Buffalo and Cincinnati, Miami and San Diego. It infused pro football
with a bolt of innovation. Gillman and Stram revolutionized offensive

attacks, but also changed the game in the trenches, Gillman with his
complex but tested blocking schemes and the myriad intricacies of his
pass offense, Stram with his unbalanced line and triple-stack defense.
The AFL became a fluid, active laboratory for football tactics. Super
Bowl IV foreshadowed the growing complexity of the modern game.

But the league had done more than bring changes to the way the game
was contested on the field. The AFL's seminal television deal paved the
way for the revenue sharing that would enrich pro football—and pro
football owners— for decades to come. Sonny Werblin's signing of Joe
Namath started to push the sport of pro football toward the realm of
celebrity culture and mass entertainment.
Most importantly, all eight members of “the Foolish Club” had made it
through, meaning the AFL was the only upstart professional sports
league to survive intact since baseball's American League began play in
1901. In the Raiders and the Chiefs, the Jets and the Chargers, and the
league's other competitors, pro football didn't merely have ten more
franchises. They'd become teams, with identifiable personalities and
characteristics. And the world of pro football was all the richer and more
complex for having grown to include them.
The Super Bowl, too, was much better for the genuine antipathy and
differences between the leagues. Though the game would get bigger, the
hype surrounding it more pervasive, the extra edge of rivalry brought to
bear in those first four contests would never again be duplicated.
It became clear that 1970 would stand as a divide. It would mark the
beginning of the third quarter-century of the NFL's history, but more
than that, the complete merger of the AFL and the NFL. If the first
quarter of a century of football's growth, the rag days of the NFL, had
been the first act, the second quarter-century, when pro football seized
the American imagination and the American marketplace, constituted
the second act.
In the Chiefs’ locker room, where Grambling coach Eddie Robinson
stopped by to congratulate Buck Buchanan, the new world champions
stood as a legacy of the efforts of Kenny Washington and Woody Strode,
Marion Motley and Bill Willis. It had been less than twenty-five years
since Washington signed with the Rams to reintegrate pro football, and

just eight seasons after the final capitulation of pro football's last
segregated team, the Redskins. But on January 11, 1970, pro football's
new world champions were celebrated. It was noted that they were the
first team to ever win a world title without winning its own division. But
there was another, more significant milestone: the Chiefs were the first
team in pro football to field a lineup in which more than half the
twenty-two starters were African-American. And that, too, was a sign of
the changing face of football in the ’70s.
In the end the most compelling metaphor for pro football's rise in the
’60s wasn't really war. The ’60s enterprise that pro football most
resembled was the American manned spaceflight program. Both rose to
unimagined heights during the decade, both were to embrace everything
that was modern about the country, and benefited from that most
modern of technologies, live television. Both were spiced by a kind of
thrill of danger and ultramodern promise, yet harked back to a timeless,
distinctly American brand of manifest destiny. Both were branded as
elaborate follies by their critics, yet captured the fancy of a large portion
of the American public. And both would be splendidly marketed: Apollo
as the ultimate voyage; pro football as the ultimate game. Even Nixon's
postgame call to Dawson had its echoes in congratulatory postmission
phone calls from JFK to the Mercury astronauts and LBJ to the Gemini
astronauts.
The vision of the Apollo missions—flight director Gene Kranz pacing
across the floor of mission control, talking through his headset while
millions of dollars of machinery left earth's orbit—was soon mimicked
on the football field, where coaches patrolled the sidelines,
communicating through headsets to experts above, delegating
assignments to their pilots on the field.
Finally, there was the sheer ratio of preparation to performance. Just
as in the space program, in football thousands of hours of collaborative
work were focused on a few hours of performance. In pro football, a
season's worth of effort and organization culminated with the result of
fourteen games, during which any player would play fifty or sixty snaps,
each play lasting six to eight seconds. And in the sum of those

compressed fragments of time was a year's harvest.
“American society was defining itself during the Cold War in a
particular kind of way in relation to the Soviet Union,” said the writer
Gerald Early.“Some of this had to do with our ability to plan, strategize,
and achieve certain kinds of goals. It's interesting that part of what the
war was about was not just on the military level, it was on an
engineering level, it was on a level of how a modern society is supposed
to be run. And we were claiming, as a democratic capitalist society, that
insofar as being able to execute certain kinds of goals, being able to plan
out certain kinds of things, and achieve them, that we could do that
better than they could. And what's football all about? Football is really
all about preparation and about breaking down the film, coming up with
a plan and a strategy and so forth. I would say during the Cold War era
particularly, that those aspects of football would be something that
would be important for our society and would be one other thing that
would make football attractive.”
Like the race to the moon, pro football was, as Rozelle took pains to
say, both news and entertainment. Life magazine's review of the decade
noted that the sport's “electric blend of brute force and computerlike
precision helped make pro football the No. 1 spectator sport of the
decade.” But it was one thing to recognize that pro football had seized
the decade, another to understand just how passionate and numerous its
followers had become. The full impact wouldn't be known for another
couple of seasons, but even by the end of the ’60s, there were broad
hints. One came later in January 1970, when the Nielsen organization
released its ratings for the week of January 5–11, showing that 60
million people saw the final battle between the NFL and AFL. The fourth
Super Bowl, the new spectacle of American sports, matching two
franchises that hadn't even existed a decade earlier, had been watched
by more American television viewers than saw Neil Armstrong walk on
the moon.
Pro football had landed.

15

Prime Time

T

he unified and expanded National Football League, now comprising
twenty-six teams in two thirteen-team conferences, kicked off its
fifty-first season on Sunday, September 19, 1970. The future of American
spectator sports arrived the following evening, at 9:00 p.m. EDT on the
ABC Television Network, as the opening weekend's final game was
introduced on prime-time television, not with a shot of the stadium, or
the crowd, or the key players, but instead with a self-referential scene set
inside a television control booth, and the voice-over of a director
urgently counting down, “Five seconds to air, four, three, two, and …
take tape!” As a jazzy riff surged forward and the opening titles flashed
on the screen, Monday Night Football took to the air.
From Municipal Stadium in Cleveland, Ohio, where the Cleveland
Browns would play host to the New York Jets, ABC's play-by-play man
Keith Jackson opened the broadcast, before turning it over to his
broadcast partner, Howard Cosell, standing down on the field. “It is a
hot, sultry, almost windless night here,” Cosell intoned, and his voice
bespoke gravity, a sense of occasion. It was, to be sure, just another
regular season football game. But in the electric tension of the sellout
crowd and the urgency of Cosell's delivery, it was as though something
more important was going on. Sports in America would never be the
same.
It is easy to forget, more than thirty years after the fact, when pro
football's preeminence seems so assured, how much of an uphill struggle
Rozelle fought, throughout much of his first ten years as commissioner,

to bring the NFL to prime time. Pro football's rapid ascent in the ’60s did
little to alter the conventional wisdom within the television industry that
spectator sports were too parochial, too male, too unsophisticated to
qualify as big-time entertainment.
In the short history of television, the only sport to receive a long look
in prime time was boxing, which nearly died because of it. But while
boxing promoters rued the consequences of overexposure, advertisers
and television executives took a different lesson: sports wouldn't play in
Peoria, at least not at night when the wife and kids were in front of the
television. From the end of Friday Night Fights on NBC in 1959 to the
beginning of Monday Night Football in 1970, there had been a bare
trickle of sports shows on any of the network's prime-time schedules.
The smattering of events—the Orange Bowl, or baseball's All-Star Game,
or the occasional one-off prime-time broadcasts of NFL games—were
viewed as anomalies.
Rozelle had argued for years that football would be a natural for a
prime-time slot and that the right package of games would only increase
the league's following. But his early efforts at promoting a package of
Friday night games ran into stiff resistance from both the NCAA and the
Alliance of High School Athletic Associations. When Congress approved
the 1966 merger, it also wrote into U.S. law that the league couldn't play
games on Friday evening. (The previous antitrust exemption, for the
joint TV deal, included the proviso that the league wouldn't play games
on Saturdays during the college football season.)
The prospect of a season-long Monday night package emerged in a
series of conversations in the spring of 1969 between Rozelle and the
innovative ABC producer Roone Arledge, whose work with ABC's NCAA
college football package brought a theatrical element to the coverage of
football. It was exactly what Rozelle was looking for, and after spending
a few weeks discussing the details, the two men agreed upon an
approach. At that point, Rozelle calmly mentioned that he must first
offer the package to the league's existing network partners, CBS and
NBC.
“But we made a deal!” blurted Arledge. “You can't just shop it.”
Rozelle patiently explained that not only would he shop it, but that he
had to shop it.

Though Bill MacPhail sensed the possibilities of the package, he was
unable to convince his superiors that CBS should break up the most
powerful lineup on TV for the untested idea of pro football in prime
time. When Rozelle had first presented the idea to CBS executive Bob
Wood, his response was,“What!? And pre-empt Doris Day?!”

NBC might have been interested, but it already had the top-rated
program of the previous two years, Rowan & Martin's Laugh-In, as the
anchor of its Monday night lineup, and had no interest in regularly
preempting Johnny Carson and the Tonight show, then bringing in
revenue of $28 million a year. (Carson had been miffed when NBC aired
a special Monday night game in 1968, and NBC did not want to ruffle
the feathers of its top star.)
With that, Rozelle told a relieved Arledge that ABC would have the
package. And then, to Arledge's horror, his boss nixed the deal. ABC
president Elton Rule was convinced that sports wouldn't play in prime
time.
Only after the ABC rejection did Rozelle reveal his Plan B: if ABC was
indeed going to pass on the package, the NFL had a deal in the works
with the Sports Network, an independent production company recently
purchased by Howard Hughes and renamed the Hughes Sports Network.
There was no need to elaborate on the implications of that deal:
awarding of a Monday Night package to the Hughes network could spark
a wholesale defection of ABC stations to the new network.
The threat was underscored on a summer day in 1969. “It was a
Monday morning staff meeting,” said Barry Frank, then Arledge's
lieutenant at ABC Sports,“and Roone was out of town, so I went to the
network staff meeting for him. The guy who was the head of our station
affiliates group gets up in the meeting and says, ‘Guys, we've got a major
problem. We're going to have to go dark on Monday nights in the fourth
quarter next year.’ And everybody says, ‘What! Why?’ He says, ‘Because
about 60 percent of our affiliates have agreed to take this syndicated
package of Monday night football.’ And [ABC vice president] Tom Moore
said, ‘Oh, shit.’ So he says to me, ‘I want you to get Pete Rozelle and get
him on the phone and tell him I want to meet with him this afternoon.’
And I did and I called Pete. And Tom went over that day. But it was a
defensive move; it was not offensive, it was defensive. Nobody knew if it

was going to be a big success or not.”
They found out quickly. The show earned a share of over 35 percent
on its opening night, en route to a consistent Nielsen rating of 18 (about
60 million homes) and a share of 31 in its first season. Reviewing the
first broadcast in its Wednesday editions, the New York Times noted,
“Executives normally tucked in bed by 11 o'clock were a little blearyeyed yesterday morning. Teen-age youngsters also stayed up, at least in
the Eastern time zone, and there were motherly mumblings about
inadequate attention to homework.” By early October, the broadcasts
had knocked ABC's Dick Cavett Show off the air on Mondays, with Cavett
moving to a four-night-a-week schedule through the end of the football
season.
What was immediately clear, in those first weeks—especially with the
use of ABC's multiple cameras—was that the games looked more vivid at
night. The color of a regular game took on an exquisite, saturated sheen,
arc lights shimmering off the shiny headgear. The entire onfield tableau
possessed a richer, more dramatic presence, accentuated by the
shortened depth-of-focus of night viewing. For the fans in the stadium
and players alike, the game offered the special incentive of knowing that
the rest of the country's fans, and many of the rest of the league's
players, were watching.
In addition to more cameras, and a separate production unit dedicated
to isolation shots and slow-motion replays, ABC offered the novel
presence of three commentators instead of two in the booth. Keith
Jackson, the crisp, low-key ex-Marine, handled the play-by-play, with
color commentary provided by Howard Cosell and Don Meredith, the
inspired combination making the difference.
Cosell's brand of pointed, often trenchant, pontification—“just telling
it like it is” he insisted—earned dramatic responses, both positive and
negative. Many critics felt he played it both ways, stirring up a froth of
hyperbole with each Monday night while at the same time bemoaning
the lack of journalistic credibility in the sports media field (“What a
horizontal ladder of mediocrity,” mused Cosell of his competition in a
1967 interview). Many fans hated him for his erudition, his arrogance,
and for the approbation he offered the boxer Muhammad Ali after he'd
changed his name from Cassius Clay. Some undoubtedly disliked him for

the simple fact he was Jewish. But his presence changed the
environment surrounding the games.
In the booth, Jackson handled the play-by-play with his usual clipped
professionalism, just a hint of his Oklahoma roots audible in some of his
calls. Cosell was forever the cultural critic, investing the game and the
surroundings with portent, an effort to bring context and gravity to the
occasion. Meredith, on the other hand, was the Southern rascal who
insisted that the game wasn't that complicated and, as a former player,
possessed the authority to back that up. He also had a knack for
deflating Cosell at his most grandiose.
During one game, Cosell noted, “So it's three downs and over for the
Kansas City Chiefs, and that's been their wont so often tonight, at a time
when they desperate—”
“Their what?” interjected Meredith.
“Their wont. W-O-N-T.”
“Aahww, Howard …”
“The education of Dandy Don continues, we await the punt …”
The broadcasts also replaced the typical halftime fare of marching bands
with a six- to seven-minute highlight package of the previous day's
biggest plays, gleaned not from the burgeoning technology of videotape,
but from the best of the footage compiled by the NFL Films crews that
sent two cameramen to each league game. This required NFL Films to
send the reel “wet,” straight off the film-editing bay, to whatever city the
Monday Night Football crew was in. There, often with no rehearsal and
nothing to work with but a bare-bones play sheet, Cosell
extemporaneously narrated the footage, with his own multisyllabic
vocabulary and pointed intonations providing an urgent counterpoint to
the sweet and empty cadences of a generation of highlights readers.
From the first broadcast—when he described the scrambling Cardinals
quarterback Jim Hart being “chased down by the irrepressible Deacon
Jones”—it was clear that Cosell would bring something different to the
package.
At a time when an easy relay of highlights was sharply limited, and

when NFL Films’ highlight package This Week in Pro Football didn't air
until the following Saturday in most markets, the halftime highlights
package became a powerful vehicle. Even in blowouts, the audience
numbers stayed strong through the halftime package.

The impact was felt within the league as well. Like all coaches in the
league, the Raiders’ John Madden was invariably hard at work on
Monday evenings, reviewing film and preparing scouting reports for the
following week's game plan. But he began to make it a habit to have an
assistant tell him when it was halftime. Then, over sandwiches and soda,
the Raiders’ staff would take a ten-minute break, and watch along with
the rest of America. “It was the only way you could see the other teams,”
said Madden.
By the beginning of the show's second season, 1971, when Frank Gifford
came over from CBS and replaced Jackson as the play-by-play man, the
series was a bona fide hit, its cultural impact unquestioned. Howard,
Dandy Don, and the Giffer were stars in their own right, treated to
celebrity welcomes in any city to which they traveled.
The on-air jousting grew more ritual, and at times threatened to
overshadow the game itself. The irony was that, though Cosell was more
critical than many broadcasters had been in the past, he also turned out
to be the most starstruck of announcers. There was something slightly
off-putting about seeing the most prominent sports journalist of his
generation parlay his newfound popularity into guest spots on sitcoms
like Nanny and the Professor. Meredith understood better than his
partners that the crew of broadcasters had become part of the show, and
he was most adept at treating it as such. When a game seemed out of
reach, Meredith would serenade the Monday night audience with the
opening line of Willie Nelson's jukebox weeper “The Party's Over,” to
indicate that the result was assured. “Turn out the lights, the party's
over/They say that all good things must end …”
By then, Monday Night Football had become a legitimate cultural
phenomenon. The tireless self-promotion on the part of Arledge and
producer Don Ohlmeyer helped further those perceptions: after reading a
story about a bowling league that had shut down on Monday nights,

Ohlmeyer started pushing the notion that leagues were dying by the
dozens; news of slow restaurant business prompted similar tactics. “We
were like Joe McCarthy running around the country,” recalled
Ohlmeyer. “I have in my pocket a list of seven thousand restaurants …”

Not all of it was imagined. In the fall of 1970, the show business trade
paper Va r i e t y reported that movie theater attendance was “in a real
nosedive as a result of ABC's pro football.” Tuesdays, rather than
Mondays, became the most common day for sick calls among Detroit
autoworkers.
Following ABC's example, the other networks added more isolation,
more close-ups, more replays, more analysis. Monday Night Football
opened the floodgates for other prime-time sports events. The first night
World Series game came a year later, in 1971, and the Summer Olympics
first went to a nightly prime-time broadcast in 1972; the NCAA
basketball championship game soon followed, making its prime-time
debut in 1973. Even more influential was the tone of Monday Night
Football. Within a few years, every game had more narrative structure, a
more intimate feel, a greater sense of sport as a performance rather than
merely a game.
Monday Night Football’s most lasting contribution was the
unprecedented amalgam of journalism and entertainment. When “Telling
It like It Is” was crossed with “Turn Out the Lights,” sports began to
change, and the relationship between fans and athletes, never entirely
innocent, grew much more complex, with a greater self-awareness on
both sides of the equation.
With the completion of the merger in 1970, the sport became more
uniform, as corporate oversight and league-wide standardization
eliminated the anomalies of earlier eras: no more botched film
exchanges, no more playing games in high school stadiums, or on fields
with misshapen end zones; no more teams dressing in Ramada Inns. The
football that was used was the NFL football, but the older league did
adopt two AFL innovations: putting players’ last names on the back of all
jerseys, and making the scoreboard the official game clock.
The old 16-10 alignment of the NFL and AFL was superseded by the
two symmetrical thirteen-team conferences, both under the NFL

umbrella.
To minimize the possibility of the Colts’ plight in 1967—having the
league's second-best record yet not qualifying for the playoffs—the NFL
decided that each thirteen-team conference would be divided into three
divisions, with the best record among nonchampions earning the fourth
playoff berth as the “wild card” team, another idea conceived by Tex
Schramm.
The unlikely star of the 1970 season was the new league's oldest
player, forty-three-year-old George Blanda of the Raiders. Twelve years
after retiring from the Bears, Blanda went on an unprecedented fiveweek run in which he either spelled Daryle Lamonica as starting
quarterback to rally the Raiders from behind, or came on and kicked the
winning field goal.
The Raiders, who'd gone to Super Bowl II, then lost the next two AFL
championship games, began the 1970 season a disappointing 2-2-1,
before Blanda took over for an injured Lamonica in the first quarter of
the team's sixth game, against Pittsburgh, throwing three touchdown
passes in a win over the Steelers. The following week, the defending
champion Chiefs were caught in the web of Blanda's astonishing run,
when Blanda kicked a 47-yard field goal as time ran out, earning
Oakland a 17–17 tie in a wild, brawl-marred game. A week later, Blanda
replaced Lamonica against Cleveland, threw a game-tying touchdown,
then kicked a game-winning field goal in the last two minutes. In the
following two weeks, he threw a late, game-winning touchdown against
Denver, and kicked the winning field goal, with four seconds left, to beat
the Chargers.
On five consecutive Sundays, Blanda had emerged from the bench,
pulled his battered silver helmet over his shaggy gray hair, and rallied
the Raiders to four wins and a tie. He became the most unlikely MVP but
also a celebrity whose popularity within a matter of weeks transcended
sports. “Now every man over 40 in the nation is young again,” wrote
Wells Twombly of the San Francisco Examiner. “Now every man in his
late 30s who was dreading his 40th birthday is looking forward eagerly
to the real ripening of his years.” Sports Illustrated put him on the cover,
as did Newsweek and Time. And within another year, he would be
promoting Wheaties and Brut (the only two products he'd endorse,

because they were the only ones—among those offered—that he actually
used). As Johnny Carson started slipping Blanda's name into
monologues, Blanda became synonymous with a newfound middle-aged
vitality. Or, as he put it on the Brut commercial,“I can keep up with the
younger guys on the field. And I like to think I can keep up with them
off the field as well.”
Even before Blanda's marvelous fall, there was, by the beginning of the
’70s, a kind of mythic ambience surrounding professional football. The
game was making inroads into the mainstream of American popular
culture in a manner that would have been unimaginable just a decade
earlier. To a certain extent, this was a result of the galvanizing
personalities of Lombardi and Hornung, Jim Brown and Dick Butkus, Joe
Namath and Johnny Unitas. But the cause of the game was also helped,
in ways so subtle as to be incalculable, by the support apparatus
developed by Pete Rozelle.
Primary among these was NFL Films, which by 1970 was producing
about twenty-five hours of original material each year. While Ed Sabol's
easy confidence and broad cinematic grounding helped get NFL Films off
the ground, it was his son Steve's restless intelligence, and questing for
something new, that would ultimately give NFL Films its signature style.
Steve Sabol inherited his mother's artistic sensibilities, but also had a
boy's love for sports and action, and grew up predisposed toward grand,
heroic images. For Sabol, sports was a tactile experience. He'd cut out
the full-page color pictures from the ’50s-era issues of Sport magazine
and paste them to the wall. While his friends gathered after school to
watch the locally taped American Bandstand, he would rush home to
watch Victory at Sea. He was transfixed with the gallantry and the
gravity of the old black-and-white documentaries, the sonorous tone of
the show's narrator, and the bracing martial musical scores that
accompanied the combat footage.
Later in life, he was drawn to dramatic artists who were capable of
grand gestures: composers like Tchaikovsky and Max Steiner—whose
rousing scores were crucial elements of such films as The Caine Mutiny
and Casablanca— and filmmaker Leni Riefenstahl, whose triumphant
1938 documentary Olympia he loved. So when his father called him at
Colorado College with the news of the formation of NFL Films—“I can

tell by your grades that all you've been doing with your time is watching
movies and playing football; that makes you perfectly qualified for this
new venture”—it wasn't just nepotism. Steve Sabol turned out to be
more of a natural than anyone could have imagined.

After the early success of NFL Films, the Sabols shot This Is Pro
Football, a documentary that would attempt to capture the broad appeal
of the sport and the power of NFL Films. The film began with a montage
of close-in football action, made more vivid by the sounds of contact,
and interspersed with close-ups of men sweating, bleeding, resting
exhausted on the sidelines. Over these pictures came a rich, resonant
voice, saying, in deep, measured cadences, “It starts with a whistle …
and ends with a bang.” The words, crisp, staccato, more evocative than
expository, were from the pen of Steve Sabol. The voice, the deep,
stentorian tones that to Steve Sabol sounded like “the fall of Dunkirk,”
belonged to a veteran Philadelphia newsman named John Facenda.
“He was an old, craggy-faced weather-beaten guy,” recalled Steve
Sabol, “who had this great, oaken delivery. I had grown up with that
voice as a kid, and I remembered him doing the news. Whenever he
spoke, anybody that was in the room watching the news just listened.”
Facenda was a casual football fan who knew little of the game's ins and
outs. But Steve Sabol, who usually wrote the scripts from which he read,
was frequently there coaching him.“He was an opera fan,” recalled
Sabol. “When we'd get to portions of the script that we really wanted to
sound dramatic, he would write the word ‘profundo.’ ”
Instead of the clanging band marches that had been the staple of
football highlights, the Sabols wanted something richer and more
dramatic. Steve recalled his teenage days at summer camp in the
Poconos, and learning old folk songs for campfire sing-alongs, with
rhythmic choruses like “What do you do with a drunken sailor, da da
dadum da dadum dum dum dum.”That tune was adapted into an
orchestral piece by a composer named Sam Spence, who for $50,000 had
scored fifteen minutes of original orchestral music for use in the film.
And then there was the cinematography. With zooms, isolation, and a
vast tableau of drama, the NFL Films crews captured the intimacy of the
game: fatigued and wounded men on the sideline, the intensity of a
linebacker's defensive coverage audibles, the lithe acceleration of a

running back moving around the corner.
When the film premiered in 1967, pro football was still far behind
baseball in the matter of myth, nostalgia, and lore. The “small ball”
theory of literature, oft joked about but held in some respect, maintained
that golf and baseball were the true literary, intellectual pursuits. But
with This Is Pro Football the league began to manufacture its own myth.
By then, NFL Films and Ed Sabol were beginning to merit widespread
press attention. “If there is a problem with the Sabol format,” wrote Tom
C. Brody in Sports Illustrated, “it is that his shows might be too good,
better than the game itself. Even the National Football League is capable
of turning out an occasional stinker, sloppily played, lopsided, dull. Call
[Ed] Sabol sloppy, even lopsided, but not dull. He has never been dull.”
“ To put it harshly, Mr. Sabol's movies are used as the shill for pro
football,” wrote Mel Durslag in TV Guide in 1969. “Their primary
purpose is to call attention to the product, keeping it before the eye of
the public and making it more salable to TV, which pours out millions
for live coverage.”
In this mission, NFL Films surely succeeded with the weekly highlights
show, This Week in Pro Football, an hour-long review with highlights of
each of the previous weekend's games, and the half-hour NFL Game of
the Week, which focused on a more in-depth look at the most important
or exciting game of the week.
That these shows found a loyal audience during the season was not all
that surprising. What was a shock was the success of the third NFL Films
show, NFL Action, which began airing in syndication in the off-season,
between March and August, with a weekly half-hour of highlights. The
show's primary sponsor, American Express, was at first reluctant to tread
on foreign ground, airing football action in the off-season. Many of the
affiliate stations, equally timid, would show it at odd hours, in the
middle of the night, or at sunrise on Saturday and Sunday mornings. But
the ratings NFL Action garnered were eye-opening, with some four
million homes finding it at different times through a typical week in the
off-season. Increased requests for public screenings of the shows soon
poured in, from Boy Scout troops, Kiwanis meetings, and Jaycee
gatherings.

This Is Pro Football proved to be the seed of a burgeoning and distinctive
NFL Films look, but what would make the Sabols synonymous with a
particular kind of cinematic style were two vastly different highlights
films, of the third and fourth Super Bowl games.

The Super Bowl III highlights film emphasized the full range of the
Sabols’ cinematic powers. It opened with a montage of Joe Namath, in
game action and mod civilian life—sporting the famous Fu Manchu on
the sidelines, walking through a crowd of jubilant New Yorkers at the
post–Super Bowl parade— and interspersed these with dozens of shots of
his adoring female fans. These were the same urbane hippie chicks
who'd celebrated the Summer of Love, but now, instead of burning bras
or protesting the war they were waving Namath signs at Shea Stadium
or sitting pretty in the stands at the Orange Bowl, wearing straw boaters
adorned with the Jets’ logo. Playing over the footage was a frothy
tribute song to Namath, “He's Our Hero, Broadway Joe,” which had been
a novelty hit in New York City during the Jets’ march to the title (“What
a feeling, what a sight/When we see that Number 12 in green-andwhite”). Nowhere was the image of the swingin’ Broadway Joe—in Dan
Jenkins's words “pro football's very own Beatle”—more aptly
demonstrated than in the opening minutes of the film. Then the quick
cutting came to an end, and the snazzy music was replaced by the
funereal strumming of a guitar, as the film cut to Johnny Unitas striding
the sideline, the shafts of the setting sun painting him in silhouette,
looking tired and haggard. It was as if someone had juxtaposed an Andy
Warhol print with American Gothic.
The opening montage owed a debt to the quick-cutting climax of
Bonnie and Clyde, and eventually the NFL Films style would exert its own
influence on filmmakers.
While the Super Bowl III film was undoubtedly brilliant filmmaking
and superb storytelling, the film that showed the true power of how NFL
Films could add depth to a game came a year later with Ed Sabol's idea
for Super Bowl IV.
The night before the Chiefs and Vikings played in Super Bowl IV, Ed
Sabol invited himself up to Hank Stram's suite at the Fontainebleau
Hotel, telling Stram that he had something important to discuss. There,
while Stram was in boxer shorts getting dressed for that evening's

dinner, Sabol pitched him on wearing a small hidden microphone for the
Super Bowl.
“It'll be historic!” insisted Sabol. “You'll wear a wire, no one else will
know you have it on, and people will finally get to see what a coach
looks like during the biggest game of the year.”
“I've got an idea,” said Stram. “Why don't you go over to the Roosevelt
and ask Bud Grant to wear a wire?”
“Number one, Bud Grant isn't animated on the sidelines,” said Sabol.
“Number two, I don't think Minnesota is going to win the game. And
number three, you don't use profanity.”
“Damn right,” replied Stram, who finally consented, provided that no
one—not even his own players—knew he was being wired. When K.C.
won going away, Sabol's brainstorm succeeded beyond his own wildest
dreams, documenting the effervescent nervousness of Stram's sideline
demeanor. The Sabols had wired players for sound before, but much of
the grunting and play calling on the field was prosaic. In miking Stram,
they found a fascinating window into the game. As the immaculately
dressed, carefully toupeed Stram paced the sidelines in his red vest and
black blazer, he peppered his team with affirmation, and even more
nervous energy than usual. (Dawson, consulting with the hyper Stram
during one timeout, thought to himself,“This guy is losing it; the
pressure is really getting to him.”) But other than a few play calls in the
distinctive jargon of the Chiefs’ offensive playbook (“65 Toss Power
Trap”), Stram didn't sound that much different from any other loyal fan
whose fortunes were rising and falling with a team on the field.
As before, the NFL Films treatment told the story in a way that
statistics and final scores couldn't. One segment, about the Chiefs’
dizzying array of multiple formations and their ability to sow confusion
in the Vikings’ defense, featured a shot of Vikings linebacker Wally
Hilgenberg waiting to call a front and coverage in the defensive huddle,
looking to the Vikings’ coaches on the sidelines, palms up, hands
outstretched, expressing complete befuddlement. When the Super Bowl
IV film premiered at the Plaza Theatre in Kansas City in the spring of
1970, it was an instant hit, so effective that some of Stram's lines were
drowned out by the laughter at earlier ones. To a national audience, it

played just as well, providing an intimate glimpse of the elusive truth of
life on the sidelines during the biggest game of the year.
The NFL Films style became so distinctive that the entire enterprise
seemed inevitable, the only way to shoot a modern football film. But this
was far from the case; in 1964, at just about the time Ed Sabol had
pitched Rozelle on bringing Blair Motion Pictures in-house, the young
director William Friedkin, who would a few years later direct The French
Connection, shot a one-hour special for ABC called “Mayhem on a Sunday
Afternoon.” Part of the continuum of documentary filmmaking inspired
by “The Violent World of Sam Huff,” the Friedkin film was much more
stylized than its predecessor, and much more dramatic. Shot in blackand-white, with veristic grit, the picture was spare, memorable, and
harsh, a flat, laconic depiction of life in the NFL. The well-reviewed film
could have been a blueprint for how to shoot football, but then the
Sabols came along, and football movies went in a different direction.
“We are not journalists but romanticists,” Steve Sabol would say later,
and that distinction would make all the difference. As he would explain,
“Even if we weren't owned by the N.F.L., we wouldn't be doing exposés
about drugs and illegal betting. That's for Mike Wallace. Renoir would
never have painted an execution. He left that to Goya.”
By 1970, the Films staff was working a brutal schedule: they would
typically shoot twelve games on Sunday afternoon, edit a seven-minute
highlights reel for Cosell's halftime highlights Monday; produce the halfhour NFL Game of the Week by Tuesday, and on Wednesday, after CBS's
Pat Summerall and Tom Brookshier had flown into Philadelphia to tape
their on-camera segments and voice-over narration, Films would send
out This Week in Pro Football to more than 100 stations across the
country. (It would be 1977 before Major League Baseball managed to
drum up a similar syndication deal, broadcasting This Week in Baseball
with Mel Allen narrating. But even this was not a counterpart, since This
Week in Baseball wasn't shot on film stock at all, but instead was a
collection of videotape clips.)
The Sabols’ imprimatur grew, from the dramatic The Championship
Chase

(“The autumn wind is a pirate, rolling in from the sea …”) to such
farcical fare as The Football Follies, a collection of miscues and wild plays
that treated the entire enterprise as slapstick (and prompted an entire
school of “sports bloopers” that never lived up to the original). One of
the signature pieces of the Follies was The Headcracker Suite, a series of
some of the game's most violent hits set to the music of “The Nutcracker
Suite.” The idea had come from a janitor at the NFL Films production
facility.
The real wonder of all this was the bottom line, or the lack thereof. In
a 1977 letter to Ed Sabol, Rozelle congratulated him for “fulfilling our
original goal for NFL Films—to operate it as a sound business entity, but
primarily as a promotional vehicle to glamorize the game and present it
in its best light.”
But to call Films a “vehicle” was to engage in massive understatement.
In addition to running a professional football league, the NFL was
operating, on the side, a full-fledged film studio, which purchased from
Kodak more film stock than any other client save the U.S. Army. The
league, at Rozelle's insistence, continued to treat Films with more or less
benign neglect, asking only that the studio not show a loss. “You
remember the quality long after you forget the price,” was one of Ed
Sabol's mantras, and it was used to justify every exorbitant expense that
was put back into the enterprise. Rozelle protected that autonomy, and
nurtured it.
While the staff was brilliant and Ed Sabol was a perfect front man,
inspiring dedication in his employees, and shielding them from the
talons of any meddlesome owners, Steve Sabol would become an equally
irreplaceable figure. Handsome, avid, and eager, the younger Sabol was
enough of a self-promoter to refer to This Is Pro Football as “the Citizen
Kane of football films,” and enough of a talent that the description
wasn't much of an exaggeration.
“It could be argued, in fact, that even more than the live telecasts of
the games themselves, the work of NFL Films has shaped America's sense
of what professional football is about,” wrote Ben Yagoda in the New
York Times. “In essence, it provided the first glimpse of the sport through
a cinematic eye. Its creative and technical innovations have been copied
by the networks. And finally, in its unabashedly sentimental and

sometimes hilariously somber treatment of the game, NFL Films has
tapped into our national penchant for melodrama and made pro football
into perhaps the most popular ongoing serial in America.”
By the ’70s, the Sabols were becoming minor football celebrities. But
their counterpart in the print realm, David Boss, was still virtually
unknown outside the industry. Yet the Creative Services division of NFL
Properties was doing precisely the same thing in the print realm that
NFL Films was doing cinematically, and—by functioning as an in-house
ad agency—increasing the league's prestige and profile, with excellent
conception and execution of a series of aesthetically pleasing products.
The tall, angular Boss possessed a rustic handsomeness befitting
someone who spent much of his boyhood in the Texas Panhandle town
of Amarillo. In 1965, after plenty of contract work in the first two years
of NFL Properties, Boss was given a charge that he would describe later
as trying “to convey, in creative ways, what this game was all about.”
The early efforts at publications by Creative Services were done
largely beneath the public radar. They were elaborate brochures
focusing on the paper and printing capabilities of the paper supplier
Kimberly-Clark. Ostensibly distributed within the printing industry as a
calling card, the magazines served as something much more. “We used
them every way possible in connection with PR,” said Don Weiss. “We'd
even include them in stuff like responses to fan mail. You can imagine
what kind of effect that had.” When Kimberly-Clark clients started
requesting the annual brochures months ahead of print time, the
company, and the NFL, knew they were on to something.
In anticipation of the league's fiftieth anniversary in 1969, Rozelle
asked Boss to update the NFL shield logo. While keeping the general
shape the same, he eliminated the thin, spindly vertical lines on the crest
behind the league's initials, made the letters bolder and more stylized,
and made the field of stars at the top of the crest more uniform. The
result was a symbol that embodied the modern age and that, thirty-five
years later, remained the single most recognizable emblem in American
sports. Boss also designed a fiftieth anniversary patch, worn on all NFL
uniforms during the 1969 season, and conceived a book called The First
Fifty Years, a lavish, coffee-table treatment of the league history that
would ultimately sell over 200,000 copies.

Boss also acted as a kind of de facto quality control executive
overseeing all of the merchandise under the umbrella of NFL Properties.
Between his oversight duty there, and his conception of different
promotional campaigns, Boss was creative catalyst of the league's print
entity. At a time when pop art was dominant, Boss helped inject
elements of an artistic sensibility into the game. In 1965, he himself
painted stylized posters for all teams, creating a series of images that
brought an adult appeal. Suitable for framing, they evinced a different
kind of sophistication. For the first time, one could imagine owning
products with team logos that could fit seamlessly into the den of a
professional with sophistication and taste. Pro football was moving off
the field, and going upscale.
While most teams still used their cartoonlike or caricature-ish logos
for any promotional materials or souvenirs, Boss was among the first to
realize the iconic power of each team's helmet emblem. Incorporating
these into pennants, team glasses, and other elements, Boss made the
helmets icons in their own right.
“I think David Boss, more than any other single person, is responsible
for changing the state of sports graphics in this country,” said graphics
executive Dave Gardner, his longtime friend and colleague. “He made
pro football visually exciting. He changed it. Sports graphics had been
really hokey—it was all cartoons and lowbrow humor. Nobody gave a
thought to layout and design. Nobody tried to think in terms of quality.
And with David, that all started to change.”
In 1970, Boss began editing the league publication Pro! Magazine, a
particularly audacious undertaking. It combined the elements of a game
program (lineups, player pictures, local advertisements) with a glossy,
literary football magazine, replete with color photography, illustrations,
and long feature pieces.
Using the success of The First Fifty Years as a springboard, he presided
over a publishing explosion. The NFL published dozens of books in the
’70s and ’80s, including Boss's magnum opus, The Pro Football Experience,
an oversized 256-page book with double gatefold spreads, heavy-coated
paper stock, and a full cloth cover, published by art book publisher
Harry Abrams. At once vivid and self-important, it was the apotheosis of
the Creative Services agenda, a book that wouldn't make much money

but would impress virtually everyone who saw it.
Rozelle hadn't conceived NFL Properties, any more than he'd thought of
the idea for NFL Films. But when presented with each opportunity, he'd
had the vision to act, and did so while realizing that the revenue that
could be generated by the ventures was far less important than the
increase in prestige, profile, and customer loyalty that would accrue to
the league and its teams. He didn't merely launch the enterprises, but
guarded them jealously, protecting them from meddlesome owners
peeved about the Sabols’ wide editorial latitude or the division's
relatively low dividends.
To his closest aides, it was clear that Rozelle paid little heed to the
owners’ gripes. Anything that caused people to connect with pro
football, and created positive associations with the sport, could only help
in the long run, regardless of how little money it might make in the
short term. And so the little fiefdoms of Films and Creative Services were
largely left to their own devices in Philadelphia and Los Angeles, helped
in numerous intangible ways. In total, the projects helped to create a
self-contained world of pro football in which fans could enter, revel in,
and spend many hours of their lives—not just on Sundays and Mondays
while watching games but throughout the week, and the off-season. All
sports simulate a parallel universe, and baseball had the daily serial
drama of a long season, the mountain of statistical data supplied by the
games, and the Hot Stove League in the winter to keep fans interest.
Football was a less constant presence, even during the season, was less
easy to document statistically, and prior to the ’60s had virtually
disappeared from newspapers in the off-season.
But with the rise of the sport in the ’60s, pro football became more
pervasive, not merely through the domination of Sunday afternoons and
Monday nights, but through the myriad ancillaries that Rozelle's forces
dreamed up. The NFL had taken advantage of the game's scarcity, using
Properties to brand the league and Films to glorify it.
While George Blanda was dominating the headlines in Oakland in the
1970 season, another old quarterback, John Unitas, was still in charge in
Baltimore. Though he was benched in the early season blowout loss to

the Chiefs, Unitas rallied to fashion his best season in five years and
would be, for the last time in his career, at the top of his game.
Bill Curry, the Colts’ center, recalled the leadership quality in Unitas.
“Unitas'd come in—of course, his track record had a lot to do with it—
and there was something about being in a huddle with him with a
minute and forty-five seconds left, and you needed a touchdown and you
were back on your own twenty-yard line. Everybody'd look over at that
famous crooked nose with the scar down it. He sort of blinked his eyes
behind the bar on his helmet, and you'd know you were going to get a
touchdown. And we would. It was all so matter-of-fact with him. There
was very seldom a pep talk. He might say to Jimmy Orr or Roy
Jefferson,‘What ya got? Can you get him on an up? Can you beat him on
an out? Is he playing you inside? Okay, let's try it out this time.’ He'd
stick his head in the huddle and call the play, boom. He assumed that we
were going to keep a pass rush off of him, and that if we did we were
going to win the game. He might say, ‘Let's go, keep them out, okay?’ It
was all very … laconic. Just straightforward business. ‘Let's go do it.
Here we go.’ ”
While Unitas was still running the show by his own wits, the game
was changing around him, with a burgeoning move toward the Paul
Brown philosophy of coaches sending plays in from the sidelines. Brown
himself was doing it with the Bengals, who won the division title in only
their third season. And Landry, whose game plans had been bolstered by
computer printouts of opponents’ tendencies as well as the Cowboys’
offensive tendencies, was doing so as well.
Super Bowl V, then, was a match-up between two teams with
something to prove. The Cowboys, labeled “Next Year's Champions” for
all their near-misses, would battle the Colts, still trying to live down the
ignominious outcome of Super Bowl III.
It might have been a battle between two play-calling styles, but Unitas
was hurt early, and spent much of the game on the bench. The game
itself was played at such a high, frenetic pitch that it turned into a
desperate, cosmic accident, with eleven turnovers and countless
blunders. The Colts won, 16–13, on Jim O'Brien's field goal in the last
minute. At the end of the game, the Cowboys’ frustrated defensive tackle
Bob Lilly threw his helmet some fifty feet into the air. Mel Renfro,

experiencing anguish in his own way, sat on the metal benches at the
foot of the Orange Bowl, staring down at the detritus of smashed cups
and discarded tape. For one more year at least, the Cowboys were stuck
with the label of Next Year's Champions.

But after the pitched Us vs. Them antipathy of the first four games, the
battle between the two old NFL rivals lacked a bit of the customary
Super Bowl fervor. “I don't want to win one for the old AFC,” said Colts
defensive tackle Billy Ray Smith before the contest. “I want to win one
for old B.R. and the Colts…. We've been in the AFC for one season—how
in hell can the league identify with us, and vice versa? We're still the
Colts the Jets beat to a lot of people in the league. Nobody's sending us
telegrams this year.”

16

“God, Nixon and the
National Football League”

F

rom the first day he arrived as a quietly confident rookie at the
Dallas Cowboys’ training camp in Thousand Oaks, California, Duane
Thomas had the look of a classic football player. The chiseled 6-foot-2,
205-pound running back had a quick first step and terrific peripheral
vision. Though he hailed from little-known West Texas State University,
Thomas had little trouble adjusting to the pro game. He learned the
Dallas Cowboys’ complex playbook quickly, carried out his assignments
with verve and authority, combined both instinctiveness and intelligence
as a running back, darting through holes that were obvious and
discovering some that weren't. Throughout his spectacular rookie season,
as he ran for nearly 1,000 yards, Thomas did everything his coaching
staff or teammates could have asked.
After the Cowboys fell, 16–13, in Super Bowl V, as many of his
teammates sat disconsolate or mutely subdued, Thomas spoke with a
wisdom beyond his years about the disappointment of losing.“Now that
it's over, I simply want to sit on the beach somewhere and watch the sun
disappear into the ocean,” he said. “I want to contemplate what has
happened. I hope that I have been enriched by the disappointment.
There is something noble in defeat. You cannot find victory unless you
first understand defeat.”
Thomas proved himself a terrific running back, and his success
provided more evidence of the wisdom of the Cowboys’ renowned

scouting department. Yet thoughout that first season and into the 1971
off-season, there was an unmistakable chill of discomfort that ran
through the Cowboys’ front office. Tex Schramm sensed that Thomas
was more complex than most football players, sensed something vaguely
anti-authoritarian in his demeanor. Thomas had performed for the
Cowboys, but they hadn't reached him yet.
Though different from many of his teammates, Thomas would prove to
be not all that atypical for his time. The period of the early ’70s brought
an odd sense of cognitive dissonance to pro football's rise. At no other
time in its history did the guiding ethos of football—teamwork, selfsacrifice, the concerted application of mental and physical discipline
toward a single, united goal— seem more out of step with the larger
cultural moment. The era was marked by perhaps a greater gap than had
ever existed, before or since, between players and management.
In the Cowboys’ case, the gap was most evident in the protracted
dissatisfaction of Thomas. He was a complicated athlete, too intelligent
to be dismissed as a flake, but much too much of an individualist to fit
easily within the Cowboys’ system. And the summer of 1971 would
provide a vivid glimpse of the clash of cultures and sensibilities that
would, throughout the early ’70s, become prevalent in the NFL. Saddled
with a bad agent, a dissolving marriage, and a contract considerably
under his market value, Thomas had approached Schramm in the offseason after his rookie year, and asked to renegotiate. Schramm could be
at once stubborn and likable, but on player issues he was a decided
conservative, one who delighted in his reputation as a ruthless
negotiator. He told Thomas that the team couldn't renegotiate his
contract but only extend it, giving him a signing bonus to add more
years to his contract at a similar scale.
There was little for the young running back to do; his contract bound
him to the Cowboys for three more seasons—the two remaining in his
contract, plus an “option” year, in which Dallas could automatically
retain him at 90 percent of his previous season's salary. Any team
wanting to sign Thomas after he played out his option then had to
provide compensation to the Cowboys, as part of the league's decade-old
“Rozelle Rule,” which stipulated that if the two teams were unable to
decide on fair compensation, the commissioner would decide for them.

All of this had a chilling effect on player movement, and left Duane
Thomas's options severely limited.
He returned to Los Angeles, where he spent the off-season rooming
with free-spirit teammate Steve Kiner, in a setting that hardly could have
been less compatible with the spartan existence of training camp. “We
lived off of Hol lywood Boulevard,” said Kiner of the summer of 1971. “I
stayed out there three months, but I left before the summer was over,
because it was just too much for me, too much of everything. Too much
drugs, too much women, too much craziness.”
When the Cowboys’ 1971 training camp opened, Thomas was nowhere
to be found, and unreachable. He finally arrived three weeks late,
accompanied by a man wearing a dashiki who called himself Ali ha ka
Kabir and who requested, through Thomas, a chance to try out for the
team. “Nobody had any idea where Duane was,” said Schramm,“and,
suddenly, he's there with this guy in a long robe. The two just stared at
me. I wasn't sure whether to bow or run. We refused the tryout and they
left again.”
On July 31, Schramm traded Thomas to New England for running
back Carl Garrett and a first-round draft choice. But after showing up at
the Patriots’ camp, Thomas promptly refused, during his first practice, to
get into a three-point stance prior to a play. He argued that, with the
Cowboys, he had always placed his hands on his kneepads when he was
in the set position, and that out of the Patriots’ I formation set, with
fullback Jim Nance directly in front of him, he couldn't see the field from
a three-point stance. After head coach John Mazur booted Thomas off
the field, the Patriots appealed to the league for relief. Against his old
friend Schramm's vigorous protestations, Rozelle rescinded the trade and
sent Thomas back to the Cowboys.
Thomas returned to Dallas and called a press conference in which he
announced that he would not speak to the media for the remainder of
the season. Before exiting, he referred to Landry as “a plastic man,”
director of personnel Gil Brandt “a liar,” and reserved a special venom
for Schramm, whom he called “sick, demented, and dishonest.”
(Apprised of the comment, Schramm chuckled and said, “That's not bad.
He got two out of three.”)

Thomas was an exceptional athlete, but his troubles with management
were symptomatic of a larger trend. Raiders linebacker Chip Oliver was
starting for the Oakland defense in 1969; the next season he was living
in a California commune called the One World Family of the Messiah's
World Crusade. The Cardinals’ Rick Sortun wrote to owner Stormy
Bidwill, announcing his retirement in a letter that began with a poem by
Ho Chi Minh. When the Dolphins’ Larry Csonka and Jim Kiick were on
the cover of Sports Illustrated in 1972, Csonka was seated against the
goalpost with his middle finger extended, flipping off the camera.
Many of those who left the game were highly critical of the culture of
football. The Browns’ Bernie Parrish, who wrote the blistering They Call
It a Game, charged that the league exploited its workers for windfall
profits. With the virulent broadside Out of Their League, the Cardinals’
Dave Meggyesy, who'd been a part-time starter over eight years before
quitting in 1970, argued that the sport was “a reflection and
reinforcement of the worst things in American culture.” In a speech to
students at his alma mater, Syracuse, Meggyesy said that “symbolically
and metaphysically, big-time football represents our violent culture and
the mode of authoritarianism. It has as its keynote competition and
militaristic, organized violence.”
Weeb Ewbank, like many other old-school coaches, was simply baffled
by the behavior of some of his players. In 1973, running back John
Riggins staged a celebrated holdout, then finally reported to camp to
sign his contract. “It was the damndest thing,” said Ewbank. “He signed
the contract sitting at the desk in my office. He had on leather pants and
was stripped to the waist, and he was wearing a derby hat with a feather
in it. It must have been what the sale of Manhattan Island was like.”
Among the most pointed, and thoughtful, critiques came from the Jets’
wide receiver George Sauer, one of the stars of Super Bowl III. Sauer had
grown up with football—his dad was the director of player personnel for
the Jets—but retired at age twenty-seven. “Football's most obvious
contradiction,” he would say later,“is its failure to teach character, selfdiscipline and responsibility, which it claims to do. I like football. It is a
framework around which you can see the dynamics of a player working
together with other players, which can be a beautiful thing to watch.
When people enjoy what they're doing it can be ecstatic. But the way it's

structured, the intrinsic values of sport are choked off. It has been despiritualized, the profane applied to the sacred. Its inherent worth—
doing it for itself, meeting challenges, the brotherhood of a team—is
denied by treating the opponent as an enemy, not an antagonist. The
game can touch you as a human being if you are permitted to touch
others as human beings. But this is difficult when you have a Vince
Lombardi type of coach hollering at you to hate the other guy, who's
really just like you in a different colored uniform.”
Lombardi indeed talked about the need for football players to hate
their opponents leading up to and during the game. But the coach,
whose politics were an iconoclastic mix of law-and-order social
conservatism with an idealistic strain of progressive liberalism, confided
in one writer during his last months that “there are a lot of things I've
missed out on, that I simply don't understand. My kids tell me things,
and half the time I don't know what they're talking about. I'm really
going to have to learn about this. I'm going to have to get out there and
talk to these young people and try to find out what's going on with
them.”
He wouldn't have the chance. He had returned to the coaching ranks
in 1969, inheriting the Redskins and becoming the toast of Washington.
But he took sick before training camp in 1970, and, on September 3, he
died from cancer. Not since the death of Knute Rockne had a football
coach been showered with more tributes upon his passing. Left
unanswered in the remembrances was how to reconcile Lombardi's
ferocity, a key component of his widespread appeal, with the virulence
of the critiques on modern football.
Lombardi had visited the ailing Dan Reeves, dying of throat cancer, in
a New York hospital in 1969, but the Rams owner outlived Lombardi by
seven months. When Rozelle saw his old boss, in the spring of 1971, he
had taken on a ghostly pallor and was clearly in pain. He did show a
spark at being rid of George Allen, whom he fired a second, and final,
time after the 1970 season. In the days before his death, in April 1971,
Reeves summoned his assistant and old friend Jack Teele over and
whispered to him his last piece of Irish wisdom: “We spend all this
money on scouting college players so that we draft the right ones,”
Reeves said. “We spend money scouting coaches so that we get winners.

But now that the league is getting so big, with so many franchises, we
need to scout owners.”
The words would prove prescient and reverberate through the coming
decades. Though his children were interested in keeping the team,
Reeves was sufficiently alienated by the final seasons with Allen that he
wanted the family rid of the burden. He put the team into a trust, and it
was sold in 1972 to the highest bidder.
Ultimately, the new owner of the Los Angeles Rams turned out to be
the old owner of the Baltimore Colts, Carroll Rosenbloom. There had
been no secret that he'd been interested in owning the Rams, but selling
his club, then buying the Rams outright would have exposed him to a
grievous tax hit. Instead, he traded the franchise to a man named Robert
Irsay, who'd grown up in the Chicago suburb of Skokie, and had earned
his fortune in industrial air-conditioning and heating. Irsay agreed to
purchase the Rams from the Reeves estate for $19 million, then trade the
club for the Colts and $4 million in cash. On July 26, 1972, the team
that Rosenbloom had built into one of the cornerstones of the city's
identity was dealt for the Rams.
The news hit like a shock around the league, and left Tex Schramm
apoplectic. “That has to go down as one of the most ridiculous
transactions in the history of professional sports,” said Schramm.
“Carroll knew it but you couldn't blame him for doing it. Imagine
trading Los Angeles for Baltimore.”
In Los Angeles, the jet-setting Rosenbloom moved seamlessly into the
owner's chair. More outgoing than Reeves, he shared a passion for the
game, and lived and died with the fortunes of his team. After a
disappointing 1972 season, he fired ex-UCLA coach Tommy Prothro,
who had been hired in 1971, and replaced him with a longtime pro
assistant, the relatively unknown Chuck Knox. Bringing Don Klosterman
over from the Colts as the new GM, the new Rams quickly returned to
the top, going 12-2 in 1973 and starting a string of six straight division
titles.
In Baltimore, it would be a much rockier ride. The Colts’ front office
and players had few illusions about Rosenbloom, but they never
questioned his commitment to winning. In Irsay the Colts would find an

uncultured, self-conscious eccentric who possessed no rapport with
players, nor made any clear effort to develop one. After the engaging
leadership of Rosenbloom and Klosterman, the Colts may have resented
any new owner and GM, but Irsay was a meddler clearly out of his
depth, and his new GM only exacerbated the inevitable tensions. Irsay
brought in the acerbic personnel man Joe Thomas, who had initially
introduced him to Rosenbloom. Thomas had played a major role in
building the Vikings and Dolphins from expansion teams to rising
powers, but he'd never run an entire football operation before, and he
lacked the interpersonal skills to earn the confidence of his players, and
moreover seemed utterly tone-deaf to the sensibilities of Baltimore's fans
and their unique relationship with the Colts.
The Colts began the 1972 season 1-4, the most memorable game being
a Unitas-Namath shootout at Memorial Stadium. Namath completed six
touchdown passes and threw for 496 yards in the Jets win; Unitas was
26 of 45 for 376 yards and two touchdowns. After the fourth loss, coach
Don McCafferty was fired, and replaced by John Sandusky, who was
then coaching the Colts’ defensive line. Later that week, some Colts
players were standing around the locker room when the phone rang.
Unitas got on the line and listened quietly for about twenty seconds as
Joe Thomas gave him some news. Then Unitas hung up the phone. His
teammates looked at him quizzically.
“I'm benched,” said Unitas flatly.“They hoped I wouldn't take it as a
slap in the face.”
Unitas would never start another game in a Baltimore uniform, but he
did have a suitably moving exit from the Memorial Stadium stage. In the
Colts’ final home game of the 1972 season, Marty Domres started against
the Buffalo Bills. During the Colts’ first drive, the stands at Municipal
Stadium erupted into a sudden and sweeping applause. Above the
stadium, a prop plane flew by tailing a banner that read, “UNITAS WE
STAND.” Domres led the team to a touchdown drive in the fourth
quarter, but strained his leg as he ran for the score, and on the next
series of downs, Unitas was called in to lead the Colts, prompting a
round of applause that was so loud that Unitas had to yell his plays in
the huddle. On the third play, he threw a wobbly pass to Eddie Hinton,
who caught it and ran 63 yards for a touchdown. That prompted another

explosion from the crowd, one that Unitas, for a rare time in his career,
recognized with a kind of shy salute, a hesitant raising of both arms, as if
at once signaling touchdown and trying to quiet the crowd.
A month later, on January 22, 1973, Joe Thomas dealt Unitas to the
San Diego Chargers for $150,000. Over the next eleven days, Thomas
would deal away eleven other players, earning the enduring anger of a
generation of Colts fans. Few argued that Unitas wasn't on the wane, but
the manner in which the affair had been handled was galling to those
who cared about Unitas and the Colts, which in this case was much of
the city of Baltimore.
George Allen landed on his feet in Washington as head coach of the
Redskins, who played their games just a few minutes away from the
Oval Office of Allen's biggest fan, President Richard Nixon.
Allen's arrival in Washington seemed inevitable. Several teams wooed
him, and the Redskins allowed him to name his terms in a package that
was unprecedented. Moving with his usual zest, Allen convinced the
Redskins to build a football complex close to Dulles Airport in the
Virginia countryside. The $500,000 building went up in four months,
complete with modern exercise equipment and carpeted locker rooms.
The two practice fields were surrounded on three sides by forest, and
Allen brought his security man, Ed “Double O” Boynton, to handle the
security detail. Before the first game of the 1971 season, Redskins
president Edward Bennett Williams famously cracked, “When Coach
Allen came to Washington, we agreed he had an unlimited budget. He's
already exceeded it.”
Allen would become famous for—and skillful at justifying—his
obsessive work ethic. He brought a game official, decked in black-andwhite stripes, with a whistle and a flag, to call penalties during practices.
Popularized around this time were Allen's “Ten Commandments of
Football,” the first of which was: “1) Football comes first. During the offseason, family and church should come one, two, with football third. But
during the season, the competition in the NFL is so tough that we have
to put football ahead of everything else.”
“I can remember George Allen's first speech to us,” said Redskins
quarterback Billy Kilmer. “He said, ‘Our enemy is the Dallas Cowboys.

You've got to have hate in your heart for the Cowboys. If you don't, we
can't beat ’em.’ ” The team quickly reflected its coach's football
philosophy: well-drilled, savvy, and opportunistic on defense, sound and
conservative to a fault on offense. Washington opened the season 6-0,
landing Allen on the cover of Newsweek, before traveling to Kansas City
for a showdown against a revived Chiefs team that was back to its 1969
form. Washington squandered a 20–6 lead and lost, 27–20. But despite
the defeat, they were greeted by a crowd of 8,000 cheering fans at the
Dulles airport that night. On the Monday after the game, Allen received
a handwritten letter from another ardent fan:
Dear George

I saw the game on TV yesterday. A truly great team must prove it is great

in defeat as well as in victory. The Redskins showed they were a great team
yesterday. You are still going to win ten.

RMN
President Richard M. Nixon did more than write notes. Later in the
season, after the Redskins had lost two games in a row, Nixon visited the
team's practice. Kenneth Turan and William Gildea, covering the
Redskins for the Washington Star, chronicled the visit: “Into the
[Redskins’] compound strode an ordinary, perhaps shortish fellow
wearing a topcoat as a concession to the weather, followed, like Moses
splitting the Red Sea, by a surging group of humanity. The man was
Richard Milhous Nixon, President of the United States, who had taken
time out of surely the world's most hectic schedule to make a visit that
wanted words stronger than unprecedented to describe it, a visit whose
sole purpose was to offer personal encouragement to his favorite team
and George Allen, his favorite coach.”
The team stayed in contention for the wild card race, and their
December 13 Monday night showdown in Los Angeles, with the Redskins
and the Rams both needing to win to stay in contention, was the climax.
Washington rolled, 38–13. In the Azores, where it was early Tuesday
morning when the game began, Nixon stayed awake until 4:30 local
time to hear the Armed Forces Network broadcast of the game. He still
got up in time for his Tuesday morning meeting with French president

Georges Pompidou.

The Redskins qualified for the NFC playoffs as a wild card, and
traveled to San Francisco for the first round. Nixon called Allen the night
before the game and, emboldened by his friendship, casually suggested
that the Redskins ought to call a flanker reverse to Roy Jefferson.
Trailing 13–6, on second-and-six at the 49ers’ eight-yard line, Allen
called the play, and Jefferson was tackled for a 13-yard loss. Nixon
would call after the game, and tell Allen that “all of Washington is proud
of the team.”
It wasn't just the Redskins; football predominated in the chief
executive's worldview, and the most powerful man in the world lapsed
easily into the role of the super-fan. In the campaign headquarters of the
Committee to Re-elect the President, there was a sign that read,
“Winning in Politics Isn't Everything. It's the Only Thing.” During the
campaign, Nixon bragged of his new “game plan” for the economy.
Nixon sent Secretary of State Henry Kissinger to the Paris Peace Talks
with the code name “quarterback.” After suspending peace talks in May
1972, Nixon ordered the planting of mines in Haiphong harbor in
Vietnam; the renewed bombing was named “Operation Linebacker.”
Nixon's fandom was a mixed blessing for the league. While it certainly
brought even more attention to a game that was already enjoying
spectacular success, the sport's best-known fan only strengthened the
belief of many that pro football was in some way a conservative sport, at
a time when that impression must have alienated as many people as it
attracted. A Time essayist named Champ Clark, writing in 1971, noted,
“In its essence, the football audience is Middle America in the raw. It is
the Silent Majority at its noisiest, relieving its frustrations in the visual
excitement of the nation's most popular sport.”
That view was by then prevalent in the counterculture, even among
those who were themselves devotees of the game. In a Rolling Stone
article titled “Fear and Loathing at the Super Bowl,” gonzo journalist
Hunter S. Thompson would explain his decision to attend the festivities
surrounding Super Bowl VIII as “a crazed and futile effort to somehow
explain the extremely twisted nature of my relationship with God, Nixon
and the National Football League: The three had long since become
inseparable in my mind.”

Thompson and Nixon, diametrically opposed in their sensibilities and
politics, but sharing a deep love of football, had talked about the game
and little else during an hour-long interview in the back seat of a
limousine during Nixon's 1968 primary campaign in New Hampshire.
Afterward, Thompson assessed the candidate's level of interest in the
sport thusly: “Whatever else might be said about Nixon—and there is
still serious doubt in my mind that he could pass for Human—he is a
goddamn stone fanatic on every facet of pro football. At one point in our
conversation, when I was feeling a bit pressed for leverage, I mentioned
a down & out pass—in the waning moments of the 1968 Super Bowl
mismatch between Green Bay and Oakland—to an obscure, second-string
Oakland receiver named Bill Miller that had stuck in my mind because of
its pinpoint style & precision. He hesitated for a moment, lost in thought,
then he wacked me on the thigh and laughed: ‘That's right, by God! The
Miami boy!’ I was stunned. He not only remembered the play, but he
knew where Miller had played in college.”
There was one tangible consequence to Nixon's passion for the sport,
and football fans would receive a lasting reward for it. For more than a
decade, Nixon had been pushing the NFL to repeal its blackout rule. In
the bloom of the Beltway's embrace of Allen and the Redskins in 1972,
Nixon finally got congressional support for the measure. It was no secret
on Capitol Hill that the congressmen around the area who couldn't get
tickets to the games wanted to be able to watch them on TV. The “trial
period” for the lifting of the blackout was rushed through the House in
the fall of 1972. Jack Kemp, now a freshman congressman from upstate
New York, the same district where the Bills had played, joked that “It
passed quicker than anything since the Gulf of Tonkin resolution.”
Rozelle had argued vehemently against the law, going on Face the
Nation to engage in some of the most strident rhetoric of his
commissionership. Partly due to his dire predictions, Congress passed
just a limited lifting of home blackouts, which would occur only if a
game was sold out seventy-two hours in advance.
In the short term, the impact of the law was pronounced. Crowds
dropped in numbers, and keeping a tabulation of the “no-shows” became
a weekly part of the NFL's box office report. But the NFL also broke its
all-time attendance record in 1973, owing in part to complete sellouts in

new stadiums like Arrowhead (where Kansas City's capacity grew by
27,000). The long-term impact was positive. It is worth remembering
that until the mid-’60s, the NFL's blackout rules meant that all the NFL
viewing available to fans in, say, Cleveland, during the course of a
season were seven Browns road games and the NFL title game (provided,
of course, that it wasn't in Cleveland). Occasional doubleheaders and the
league's experimentation with prime-time games added to the menu by
the late ’60s; the merger and the advent of Monday Night Football had
opened the floodgates in the ’70s. In football-mad cities like
Minneapolis-St. Paul, Denver, and Washington, the sellouts continued
and fans who couldn't get tickets were now able to watch all of their
team's games. And that, in turn, provided a serious boost to television
ratings, helping the NFL gain another big increase in rights fees when
the next TV contract was negotiated in 1974.
Football moves in eras and, in the competitive sense, the 1970 season
was a carryover of the ’60s, with established powers Dallas and
Baltimore battling for the Super Bowl. The pivot on which the new
decade turned was Christmas Day 1971. Going into that playoff
weekend, the case could be made that the Cowboys and Chiefs
represented the two model franchises of the NFL. The traits the two
clubs shared, besides their common birthplace, were administrative
stability, scouting excellence, head coaches who had led them
throughout their existence, and a tradition of consistency and
innovation.
But on that day, the fortunes of the two clubs diverged. While Dallas
knocked off Minnesota en route to its first Super Bowl title, the Chiefs
were upset by the Dolphins, a young team built for the bruising realities
of the ’70s game. It would be fifteen years before the franchise would
make the playoffs again.
Like so many epic games, this one turned on a handful of plays. But
the one that best illustrated the elusive, confounding nature of the game
came early in the second quarter. After Kansas City jumped to a 10–0
lead and Miami had narrowed the gap to 10–7, the Chiefs drove back
down the field before their drive stalled well within field goal range of
All-Pro kicker Jan Stenerud. During their preparation for the game, the
Chiefs’ staff had noticed while reviewing Dolphins game film that when

defending a field goal attempt from a hashmark, the Dolphins tended to
overload the short side of the field. So Stram installed a fake field goal
play that called for deep snapper Bobby Bell to snap the ball directly to
kicker Jan Stenerud, who would run a sweep to the opposite side. Len
Dawson, holding for the snap, saw the Dolphins overload the short side
and made the audible to signal the fake. But a miscommu-nication
among three future Hall of Famers spelled the play's demise.
“So we're on the hashmark, and we're all excited,” said Stram. “It's
perfect. So Lenny calls, ‘two-two.’ That means the ball's coming to Jan—
and nobody knows how fast Jan was, especially with somebody chasing
him. He ran about a four-five, four-six forty. So Jan is doing such a good
job of acting that Bobby Bell, as he looks through his legs, sees Jan
looking down at the spot. He thought he blew the automatic. So he
snaps the ball to Dawson, who's totally surprised. Both guards pulled on
the play. They're standing out to the right side, about ten yards
downfield, looking back to see where Stenerud is. He would have gone
right in for the touchdown.”
Instead, Stenerud's rushed kick attempt was blocked, and the Dolphins
surged back to tie the game at 10. Late in the fourth quarter, after Miami
tied the game again at 24, the Chiefs’ Ed Podolak, having one of the
great playoff games ever, returned the ensuing kickoff 78 yards, only to
be run down by the Dolphins’ Curtis Johnson. After three runs into the
line, Stenerud kicked the ball wide and the teams headed to overtime,
where both Stenerud and Garo Yepremian missed fifth-quarter attempts,
before Larry Csonka's 39-yard gain on a trap play set up Yepremian for
the sixth-quarter game winner, after 82:40 of game time.
There were two Hall of Fame coaches and eleven Hall of Fame players
on the field that day, and when it was all over, Willie Lanier spoke for
all of them. Walking off the field, an exhausted Lanier and his longtime
roommate and linebacker partner Jim Lynch were too fatigued to speak.
But in the end, he wasn't haunted. “I left everything I had out there on
that field,” Lanier said. “That was what pro football was about, that was
the game at its best.”
Miami then eliminated the aging Colts in the AFC championship game,
a particularly satisfying win for Shula, to advance to New Orleans to
play the Cowboys in Super Bowl VI. At 1:30 in the morning, eight hours

following the game, Nixon phoned Shula's house, to suggest a play for
the Super Bowl, a down-and-in pass to Paul Warfield. “When the phone
rang at that hour,” said Shula, “I thought it was just another crazy fan.”
In Texas, Lyndon Johnson sent a telegram to Cowboys coach Tom
Landry two days later, saying, “I will be watching the Cowboys, but I
won't be sending in any plays.”
By the sixth Super Bowl, with the leadership of Rozelle and Jim Kensil,
and the painstaking detail work of publicity director Don Weiss, the
league had developed a set of dueling all-access press interviews known
as Media Day, when during the course of a four-hour period the Tuesday
before the game, all the players and coaches from both teams were made
available to all the media representatives (by now nearing 1,000).
Media Day would eventually grow into one of the biggest and most
self-parodying aspects on the entire sports calendar, but for sheer
surrealism, it would be a long time before anything could top the events
of the Media Day prior to Super Bowl VI. When the Cowboys took to the
field for their interviews, Duane Thomas showed up, sat down at his
required seat, and was surrounded by reporters. A few opening questions
yielded no reply and so for nearly fifteen minutes, Thomas and two
dozen reporters just stood there, in a mute standoff. After some time had
passed, Thomas asked the writer closest to him, the AP's Will Grimsley,
what time it was. Grimsley wasn't wearing a watch, but nervously stared
at his naked wrist for several seconds before answering that he didn't
know the time. Shortly thereafter, Thomas left, though the sight of him
moving his lips had brought even more reporters to the scene.
The game itself was a desultory affair, played in frigid conditions and
with precious little suspense. Miami was dominated by the Cowboys’
“Doomsday Defense,” which bottled up the Dolphins’ running game,
double-covered deep threat Paul Warfield throughout, and harried
quarterback Bob Griese into uncharacteristic mistakes. In the victorious
dressing room, after both Clint Murchison and Tex Schramm had been
escorted fully clothed into the showers, the dripping Murchison proudly
announced that, “This is the successful end of our 12-year plan.” Lyndon
Johnson stopped by to congratulate his friend Murchison and the

omnipresent Nixon made his by-now customary call to the winning
coach, about which Tom Landry noted that, “He praised our offensive
line.”
Elsewhere in the dressing room, a blasé Thomas, flanked by adviser
Jim Brown, broke his silence and consented to an interview with a
nervous Tom Brookshier of CBS. It proved to be one of the more curious
encounters in the history of sports television, a study in American
contrasts, between white and black, old and young, square and hip,
polite and defiant.
A jumpy Brookshier observed, “Duane, uh, you do things with speed
but never hurry, a lot like the great Jim Brown. You never hurry into a
hole. You take your time, make a spin, yet you still outrun people. Are
you that fast, are you that quick, would you say?”
“Evidently,” said Thomas, prompting a round of laughter from his
teammates.
Though headed in different directions competitively, the Cowboys and
Chiefs remained in lockstep in one of the great trends of the post-merger
era, the rush to new stadiums. Many of these were the charmless circular
structures shared by baseball and football teams (Philadelphia's Veterans
Stadium, Pittsburgh's Three Rivers Stadium, Cincinnati's Riverfront
Stadium, and St. Louis's Busch Stadium) and well-suited for neither
sport.
Taking advantage of the economic boom and the new public
enchantment with football, both the Chiefs and Cowboys pushed for
football-only stadiums, and the results were mostly impressive. Texas
Stadium, built in suburban Irving, near affluent North Dallas, offered
infinitely more comfort than the Cotton Bowl. Kansas City built two
stadiums, side by side—the football-only Arrowhead Stadium and the
baseball-only Royals Stadium—and while the project was derided by
some as a cloning of white elephants it turned out to be a bargain, the
entire project having been funded for $43 million.
Both Texas Stadium and Arrowhead were built at the confluence of
intersecting freeways, both were blessed with the most modern of ’70s
amenities, from wide, dazzling scoreboards and spacious corridors to, far
above the field, glassed off in partitions of plush carpeting and wood-

grained tables, some of the sport's first “luxury suites.”
When the Cowboys moved into Texas Stadium in 1971, and when the
Chiefs opened Arrowhead Stadium in 1972, the stadiums immediately
became the envy of the league's owners. For the owners, the stadium
was not merely a place to cheer the home team, but a residence in which
one entertained guests. And the accoutrements and trappings of Texas
Stadium and Arrowhead instantly rendered the press boxes and private
booths in the older stadiums tinny and obsolete. Suddenly, the grand
bowl of the Los Angeles Coliseum, the vast cement superstructures of
Cleveland's Municipal Stadium and Baltimore's Municipal Stadium, even
the relatively new Shea Stadium, seemed archaic.
What both Hunt in Kansas City and Schramm and Murchison in Dallas
realized was that the only way to maximize the stadium experience was
to broaden the stadium. Most baseball stadiums couldn't justify a
capacity of more than 50,000. But a football stadium, filled just nine or
ten times a year, could build thousands more seats—Arrowhead sat
78,000, Texas Stadium 64,000—and do so in a much more coherent
fashion than in converted baseball stadiums.
While the sight lines at the new stadiums were invariably better (every
seat at Arrowhead faced the 50-yard line), the seats more comfortable,
the food more plentiful, and the facilities more accommodating, the
mood at the new stadiums was more subdued. Fans were at once more
comfortable and less involved. It changed the clientele for pro football,
making it more corporate, more affluent, and more white. “It was very
disappointing to me because it eliminated a lot of black Americans from
attending the games,” said the Cowboys’ Mel Renfro. “It eliminated the
crowd that we used to have with the excitement and the noise. It was
just different, like you were playing in your living room. It was a bunch
of rich people who you couldn't get excited about anything. It was just a
totally different atmosphere.”
The same was true in Kansas City. At Hank Stram's behest, the Chiefs
became even more stylish when they opened their new stadium, wearing
shiny red patent leather game shoes at Arrowhead (“You go out there
first and see if they laugh,” said George Daney to a teammate before the
team's first game in the new shoes). Stram's sideline attire went from
natty to mod, as he wore suits with epaulets, leisure suits, even—most

memorably—a tailored one-piece “unisuit” outfit about which Dawson
was still laughing thirty years later. At the same time, the stadium was
less intimate than Municipal, the rowdy “Wolfpack” rooting section
behind one end zone further away and a little less intimidating for
visiting teams.

The final characteristic that both stadiums shared was inevitable and
unquestioned at the time. In Dallas and in Kansas City, as in any major
new stadium of consequence in the early ’70s, the field was an artificial
surface.
AstroTurf had come about as something of an accident. When the
Houston Astros baseball team began play in the Astrodome in 1965, the
roof was installed with windows, allowing grass to grow inside. But
fielders complained that they were losing balls in the glare of the dome's
glass roof, and when the glass was painted to obscure the glare, the grass
died. The Monsanto Company had spent much of the previous decade
developing an artificial surface that would serve as a grass substitute for
the cement playgrounds of urban areas. When Monsanto installed the
fabric onto the playing surface of the Astrodome in 1966, they dubbed it
AstroTurf, and the rush was on.
The claims of effectiveness against knee injuries hastened the rush to
embrace the surface, and initially, both the league and the players joined
in. “There is every indication,” Rozelle said in 1968, “synthetic surfaces
cut down on casualties, particularly of the knee type.” By 1969, he was
predicting that within five to ten years “we'll have artificial turf on all
our fields.” Poly-Turf, used at the Orange Bowl for the Super Bowl in
1970, was endorsed by the National Football League Players Association
(earning a percentage on every square yard of the surface sold by
American Biltrite). Monsanto ran an ad in the Super Bowl IV program
claiming that AstroTurf could “reduce crippling knee and ankle injuries
up to 80%.”
But among players, the grumbling began almost instantly, as it quickly
became apparent that artificial turf could not live up to the claims made
for it. Temperatures on artificial fields could spike up to 30 degrees
higher. And footing was far from sure—slippery on AstroTurf when it
was wet, and equally unsure on Poly-Turf when it was dry. Don Shula,
reviewing film of two of the Dolphins’ games on the Orange Bowl Poly-

Turf in 1971, spotted 114 instances of players slipping on the field. But
the greater concern was the additional physical toll. Players found that
they would be sore for a longer period of time after a game on artificial
turf, and that even a week's practice on the surface had repercussions. By
September of 1971, the Bears’ star Gale Sayers was denouncing it in a
Sport magazine story.

At Arrowhead, the Chiefs’ redoubtable groundskeeper, George Toma
(the “Sod God” who would be put in charge of Super Bowl fields over
much of the next three decades) was spending his time cleaning bubble
gum and tobacco stains on the carpet. “The thing I couldn't figure out,”
said Bobby Bell, “is when you've got the best grass guy in the world,
they'd go to a carpet. I mean, this guy can grow grass in your pocket—
and they wanted to get turf.”
Every week, it seemed, one of the Chiefs’ starters was suffering joint
ailments from the constant pounding of the artificial turf. Early on in
that first season, several veterans, in Len Dawson's words, “begged Stram
to get some relief from the stuff. All you have to do is get a few burns on
that stuff, and have it stay on your elbow, or your knee for a whole
season. And in my case, a couple of times, I got blood poisoning”
because festering wounds would open and, when mixed with the
chemical compound used to treat the turf, would become infected.
Tom Condon, who joined the Chiefs in 1974, would recall waking up
the morning after a game, with burns and abrasions having opened
during the night, with the painful skinless flesh being literally stuck to
the sheets. “You can't just rip the sheet off, because that starts the
bleeding again,” Condon said. “So you go in the shower and stand there
with these sheets stuck to your arms and let the water kind of loosen
them. It's disgusting.”
The novelty also wore off quickly for fans in the stands. “Artificial turf
has made football look strange,” mused Bud Shrake in Sports Illustrated
in 1972. “Take the foot out of the grass and put it on a carpet, and the
game can seem to become an amusement, like the hotel ballroom boxing
matches staged for gentlemen in dinner jackets.”
Within the league itself, the push to artificial turf was myopic and

misguided yet in some ways entirely understandable. The NFL was just a
generation removed from a time when a team's profit or loss might hinge
on the weather during a few late fall Sundays. Even before the fountains
in New Orleans froze the week of Super Bowl IV, the previous decade
had been marked with title games played in inclement conditions—the
1962 and 1963 title games were brutal, frigid affairs, the 1964 BrownsColts game and the 1965 Packers-Browns contests were both played in
chilled, sloppy quagmires; and the classic 1967 Ice Bowl, obviously, was
the worst of all, a game that left many of the competitors with frostbite
and other permanent injuries.
Of course, one of the main reasons the Ice Bowl stood out in memory
was because of the adverse elements. And while few of those who
participated were happy the game was played in such brutal weather,
the game's mantle of greatness was passed down largely because of those
conditions. The 1966 NFL title game, also between the Packers and
Cowboys, also came down to a decisive last-minute play on the goal line,
between the same two teams, but the elements were less of a factor, and
that title game has been permanently eclipsed by the Ice Bowl.
The decision to play the Super Bowl in a warm-weather city was a
direct reaction to the string of inclement championship games of the
’60s. And the decision about which warm-weather city it would be was
dictated largely, in the early ’70s, by which stadium could promise
synthetic turf. Don Weiss recalled that the key presentation that allowed
Miami to get Super Bowl V and New Orleans to get Super Bowl VI were
guarantees by the Orange and Sugar Bowls that they would have
replaced their grass fields with artificial turf in time for each of the
games.
But as early as 1972, Tex Maule had seen enough harrowing scenes of
locker room suffering to withdraw his earlier wholehearted endorsement
of the game's rush to the artificial surfaces. Writing in Sports Illustrated,
he warned that “if it develops that there are more injuries on the
manufactured fields, it is not going to be all that easy returning to grass.
The cost is steep, many owners have no control over the stadiums in
which their teams play— for instance, many stadiums are built to
accommodate baseball as well as foot-ball—and there is always the
matter of TV.” After years of quagmires like the 1965 NFL title game,

when numbers were virtually obscured by the mud on the field, there
was a feeling that artificial turf would be an improvement simply
because it made jerseys more legible.
The jerseys would indeed be easier to see; but the game itself would
become less pleasurable to watch.
It wasn't the artificial turf that caused the decline of the Chiefs. Stram's
Napoleonic desire to run all football operations, as well as his loyalty to
the aging players who won the Super Bowl, would lead to his undoing.
In their drafts from 1970 through Stram's final year in 1974, the Chiefs
selected only two regular starters, wide receiver Elmo Wright and
defensive end Wilbur Young.
In Kansas City, Stram had demanded, and eventually received, the
right to act as a single decision maker overseeing all football decisions.
He made the selections in the draft, he negotiated contracts, he made
trades, and he coached the team. And he and the Chiefs would discover,
too late, that the jobs had grown too large to be done well by one man,
especially a man who didn't delegate responsibility. The team had lost its
edge, and its fall was inevitable. In Stram's last season, the 5-9 setback of
1974, the team was still starting thirteen of the twenty-four players who
had started Super Bowl IV.
And so Hank Stram, the only coach in the history of the Kansas City
Chiefs, was fired after the 1974 season. The Chiefs had very nearly
played in three of the first six Super Bowls; after the 1971 Christmas Day
loss, it would be twenty seasons before Kansas City would host another
postseason game.
Meanwhile, in Dallas, Tom Landry, the only coach in the history of the
Dallas Cowboys—bolstered by a modern football organizational
mechanism that divided the football duties into three clear areas of
responsibility—was only halfway through a tenure that would last
twenty-nine seasons. During that span, the Cowboys enjoyed one stretch
in which they qualified for the playoffs in seventeen out of eighteen
seasons, and enjoyed twenty straight seasons of winning records.
The teams that excelled in the ’70s—the Cowboys, the Rams, the
Dolphins, the Steelers, the Raiders, and the Vikings would win forty of

the decade's sixty division championships—had one thing in common: a
leg-up in personnel evaluation. There had been other variables in the
’60s—the intrigue and subterfuge of the baby-sitters, the equalizing
advantage of deep pockets (Hunt and Adams), and grand visions
(Werblin). But in the ’70s, with no free agency and a common draft,
other variables became less relevant and personnel departments became
critical. Not all of the successful teams worked with the same blueprint.
Dallas had its smoothly humming computer, the Raiders were stridently
anti-computer in their work, Pittsburgh split the difference between data
and gut instincts. But each of these teams found an edge in scouting that
would prove decisive.
Though the Cowboys finally won their first title in the 1971 season,
their squad was aging, and it would be four more years before they'd
return to the Super Bowl, with a much different cast. The quintessential
team of the early ’70s was the Miami Dolphins, who were quickly built
into a power by Don Shula. The Dolphins’ colors were snazzy but
nothing else about the team's playing style evoked excitement. Playing
on the Orange Bowl's bluish green Poly-Turf, the team became an
extension of Shula's no-nonsense, no-mistakes asceticism. Shula had
studied under an assortment of the game's best teachers, playing for Paul
Brown and Weeb Ewbank, and later working for a year as an assistant
under Blanton Collier at Kentucky. His years as the youngest head coach
in the NFL with the Colts in the ’60s were both successful and stormy.
He tangled frequently with Johnny Unitas, and often made decisions that
had once resided with the quarterback. By the time he got to Miami, he'd
developed a commitment to execution and built a team that was
designed to control the ball and not make mistakes. On defense, his
assistant Bill Arnsparger made it a weekly priority to take away the
opponent's most dangerous weapon. (In the 1971 playoff game in Kansas
City, the Dolphins double-covered Otis Taylor on nearly every play, and
the Offensive Player of the Year in the AFC was held to 12 yards on
three catches.)
In 1972, Miami opened at the unveiling of Kansas City's Arrowhead
Stadium, and beat the Chiefs easily, 20–10, in the rematch. Thus began
an improbable march through an undefeated season. The toughest game
they played that year was a 21–17 win over Chuck Noll's up-and-coming

Pittsburgh Steelers in the AFC championship game. That game was
played in Pittsburgh, since under the league's rotation playoff site
system, the Dolphins’ 14-0 record didn't guarantee them home field
advantage.

Miami received scant respect prior to Super Bowl VII in the Los
Angeles Coliseum. Despite an unbeaten record and their second
consecutive trip to the big game, Miami was a betting underdog to
George Allen's Washington Redskins. Allen's veteran-laden “Over the Hill
Gang” defeated the Dallas Cowboys for the NFC title on December 31,
1972. The next morning, Allen and his family were the guests of
President Nixon at the White House, though this time the chief executive
suggested no plays.
The Dolphins’“No-Name Defense” was dominant, perfectly
complementing the team's ball-control offense. Leading George Allen's
Redskins 14–0 late in Super Bowl VII, the Dolphins lined up for a field
goal that would have made the score a symbolic 17–0, to match their
record. But after the attempt was blocked, kicker Garo Yepremian tried a
comical pass that slipped out of his hands and into the arms of
Washington's Mike Bass, who returned it 49 yards for a touchdown. The
game ended 14–7, but wasn't that close.
Miami would prove to be all too representative of its era—using a
conservative offense that passed sparingly, and stifling opponents with a
defense that choked the run, and a zone that thwarted long passes. In so
doing, they played perfectly to the thickening pace of the game, and
provided a sobering reminder that though Rozelle and the league
worked to highlight the excitement and aesthetic appeal of pro football,
those who contested the game were preoccupied with the final result
only, even if achieving that result often made for boring football. The
1972 season saw 114 fewer touchdowns than 1966, but 141 more field
goals. After marching through the 1973 season with a 12-2 mark, the
Dolphins dismantled the Vikings, 24–7, in what the veteran writer Wells
Twombly would describe as “the dullness that was Super Bowl VIII.” The
blowout came at the end of a season in which, even with scoring down
again, only a third of NFL games were decided by seven points or less.
The Super Bowl itself was never in doubt—the Dolphins scored on their
first two drives and Griese threw just seven passes the entire game. The

headline in Pro Football Weekly was typical of the public perception of
the Ultimate Contest: “Dolphins Were Super—Game a Drag.”

17

America's Team

T

he paradox of the early Super Bowls was that even as the games
themselves often disappointed, the Super Bowl's popularity
continued to grow, a tribute to both pro football's new preeminence and
the relentless marketing power of the league. Lacking the tradition and
history of the World Series, Super Sunday compensated with pomp,
circumstance, and an overarching sense of self-importance. Astronauts
recited the Pledge of Allegiance, Anita Bryant sang “The Battle Hymn of
the Republic,” Billy Graham delivered the invocation, and the Blue
Angels did the flyover. “If Jesus Christ were alive today,” said Norman
Vincent Peale in 1974, “he'd be at the Super Bowl.”
Rozelle routinely expressed amazement at the growth of the sport and
its signature game. “If someone had asked me about pro football's future
when I became commissioner in 1960,” he told Playboy in a lengthy
interview, “I wouldn't even have come close to predicting what the sport
has achieved in 1973 as to number of teams, television exposure and
revenue, attendance and so on.”
The self-effacing answer was plausible until one stopped to realize
how often Rozelle repeated it, and noticed further how few things
happened by accident in the NFL.
Other than the actual playing of the game, nothing was left to chance
at the Super Bowl. The sites, by the mid-’70s, were selected two years in
advance, and accommodations were planned to the nth degree, the
thirty-five-page prep book of the first Super Bowl morphing into an
overgrown manifesto of game planning. To aid in the already over-the-

top buildup, the NFL standardized a two-week gap between the
conference championship games and the Super Bowl, to allow more time
to work out the logistical hurdles. The league brought both teams into
the city where the game was being played six days prior to kickoff, and
during this week of interviews, the NFL distributed a staggering amount
of information to the 2,000 assembled members of the media. There
were press conferences every day, taped by the league staff and brought
back to the massive press facility, so that the busier journalists—as well
as the lazier ones—could cover the news without leaving the room.
The Friday before the game became Rozelle's personal tour de force.
At 11:00 a.m., he would march to the podium in the largest room at the
media headquarters and conduct what had come to be known as his
annual “state of the league” address, then take questions afterward. The
overall tone resembled nothing so much as a presidential press
conference, and Rozelle prepared for them in the same way. On the eve
of the Friday press conference, he'd gather three or four trusted aides,
and they would pepper him with the most likely questions. Come the
time for the press conference, if there was something that Rozelle knew
he wanted to address, one of his friends—often Pat Summerall—would
be prompted to ask an early question. This deck stacking was never
heavy-handed, and that was why Rozelle was so successful at it. “You
ask him about a particular court case,” noted one veteran writer in 1975,
“and he not only tells you the judge's name but cites six other similar
cases. There isn't a thing he can't answer. He never brings a note.”
Rozelle was never arrogant, but on these occasions he displayed an
assurance that bordered on jauntiness. After finishing his prepared
remarks, he'd light a cigarette, smile slyly, and say, “Fire away.”
The timing of the press conference was no accident either: by Friday,
teams were in their final preparations, with less time or patience for the
incessant questions of the throng of press. So Rozelle's press conference
served to take the heat off the teams, and fill a news void, providing
something for Saturday editions, before the flood of Sunday game
preview stories. It was this intuitive understanding of the media that was
one of the most important and least understood of the NFL's advantages
over other sports leagues. “The NFL was always the savviest PR
organization of all of them, and they've always wanted to manage the

news,” said theWashington Post’s Tony Kornheiser. “They always wanted
to manage the news, and they manage it better than ever. It's because
the NFL has understood and mastered the way of keeping everybody at
arm's length while giving you the illusion that you're right there. And
you're not right there.”

Friday nights were devoted to the league's official party, which came
to be known as the Commissioner's Party. As media representatives and
advertising friends of the league clamored for tickets, the function grew
and grew. By January 1974, it was held at the Astrodome in Houston,
with a guest list of 2,900. The crushing press hordes and two-week
buildup often yielded disappointing games, and predictable criticism.
But it had little impact on the viewership or ticket demand, which
continued to escalate beyond that of any other single American sporting
event. Eventually the sheer enormity of the press coverage not only
affected the players and fans, but the press itself.
“People just go on ahead and write about the World Series,” noted Roy
Blount, Jr.“The Super Bowl they have to get an angle on. Try to
blindside the sucker. Find the seam in its zone. Usually, after a week of
free liquor and promotion, they wind up just scoffing at the $2.8 million
Super Bowl–eve party, because they have to stand in line for the stone
crabs behind Tony Orlando's go-fer, and file a hung-over game account
that runs under the head, ‘SUPER BOWL NOT SO SUPER.’ ”
By the mid-’70s, Rozelle was commonly regarded as the smartest, most
powerful man in American sports. People routinely mentioned him as a
candidate to hold higher office, and some viewed him as though he
already did. The Colts’ PR man Ernie Accorsi left Baltimore to join the
league office in 1975. “Being around him was how I imagined the New
Frontier,” Accorsi said. “It was like going to Washington to work for the
Kennedys.”
Behind the scenes, Rozelle remained by all accounts a conscientious
single parent, who went to extraordinary lengths to include his teenage
daughter, Anne, in all that he could. She turned thirteen in 1971, and he
brought her more often on his dinner outings, to “21” or P.J. Clarke's,
introduced her to many of the women he was dating at the time. He'd

take her along on weekend trips to games, leave work before dark on
winter afternoons to take her sledding or skating at the Rockefeller
Center skating rink.
One day in 1974, Rozelle was sitting over drinks, with Pat Summerall
and Jack Landry, at the Bel Air Hotel in Los Angeles. A striking brunette
walked by and the men stopped talking for a moment, in silent
appreciation. Afterward, Rozelle quietly stated, “That's the one.”
“That's the one what?” asked Summerall.
“That's the woman I'm going to marry. Do you know who she is?”
“No, but I can find out.” Summerall knew the bartender at the Bel Air,
and sidled over on a reconnaissance mission. He returned a few
moments later, and sat back down in the booth.
“I'm not sure you want to know who she is,” said Summerall, then he
explained. The cosmopolitan, self-possessed, and radiantly beautiful
woman was named Carrie Cooke. She was the mother of four and,
though separated from her husband, still the daughter-in-law of Redskins
majority partner Jack Kent Cooke.
There was a moment of silence. “Small world,” offered Landry.
But Rozelle was undeterred. “Do you think I could meet her?” he
asked Summerall. The courtly Summerall walked over and invited Cooke
and the two women she was with to join them at his table for
introductions.
Later that year, Pete and Carrie were married.
His daughter, fifteen at the time, could tell instantly that this
relationship was different.
“She was absolutely perfect for him,” said Anne. “If I had been him, I
would have fallen for her, too, there's no question. She was beautiful,
she was charming, she could make anyone feel at ease. She lit up a room
when she walked into it, she was sophisticated, an excellent tennis
player, acted interested in everyone she met, had a very diversified
background, she'd been in nursing, modeling, race-car driving, she'd
done several different things.”
Rozelle's life changed quickly, beginning with a move to Harrison,
New York, forty-five minutes outside the city, where Pete and Anne were

joined by Carrie and her four children. He bought a regal Tudor mansion
with a putting green, tennis court, swimming pool, and a perfect English
library where Rozelle could scour his newspapers on the mornings he
didn't take a car to the office.
With Carrie's involvement, the league inaugurated National Football
League Charities, which would, in its earliest years, funnel all the profits
from NFL Properties into a charitable fund, whose board included the
likes of Ethel Kennedy. The league also worked with the United Way for
a series of effective, heart-tugging spots run during every game (the
league had stipulated that two minutes of commercial time from every
game be retained by the league to use as it saw fit, to promote its own
product or, as in the case with the United Way spots, to air public
service messages). The premiere found the Cowboys’ Roger Staubach
featured with Gayla Vaughn, a seven-year-old with a congenital heart
defect, and its effective imagery—of the strongest men in society
reaching out to help the weak and infirm—would become a staple of
NFL broadcasts for decades to come.
Around the office, Rozelle began keeping more regular hours. Though
he eschewed limousines, he would take a sedan or station wagon into
work, usually left the office by 6:00 p.m., and delegated more authority
to the diligent, gruff Jim Kensil (known as “The Nazi” to his staff) and
the exceedingly thorough director of publicity, Don Weiss. Rozelle still
lingered over details, vetting and reworking the wording of press
releases, approving all the designs for the Super Bowl posters, programs,
and tickets. If he seemed less driven, it was perhaps because he'd
brought the league into a period of relative stability, had successfully
ushered his daughter into her teenage years, and, in his personal life,
was finally and completely happy.
The personal happiness would last. The professional happiness would
not.
On July 3, 1974, the National Football League Players Association went
on strike, and began picketing the opening of training camps, forming a
line in front of the Chargers’ camp in San Diego. Each of the fifty players
walking the line, accompanied by NFLPA executive director Ed Garvey,

wore a T-shirt that read,“NO FREEDOM, NO FOOTBALL.”
The antagonism between players and owners had been a long time
coming—the first discussion of the possibility of a players association
had occurred in 1956—and reflected the reality of a genuine shift in the
marketplace. From the perspective of veteran owners like Halas, who
had guided the league through the Depression, a world war, and
challenges by the AAFC and AFL, modern players were remarkably well
paid. But in 1974, players were still making a fraction of what athletes
in other sports earned. Just as the players had feared, the signing of the
merger and the common draft eliminated the large bonuses that had
elevated all players’ salaries in the ’60s. By 1970, the players were
cognizant of a league that was making exponentially more money than it
ever had before, while real salaries had changed only marginally since
1960. The owners, after nearly going under during the madness of the
war years, were not inclined to share all their newly won riches with the
players.
Because pro football had for so long been a poor stepchild to baseball,
some of its customs, such as paying the players nothing during training
camp, held long after ceasing to be a financial necessity. By the ’60s,
when players began improving their working conditions, even modest
gains were viewed as triumphs. “Tuesday is pay-day,” wrote Roman
Gabriel of the training camp grind, in his memoir of the 1969 season. “It
isn't much but it's something— something like $209 after taxes for last
week's game plus $10 a day, or $70, for expenses. I remember when we
didn't get anything for eight weeks at training camp except room and
board and a few bucks for laundry. This is an improvement that the
players association has made.”
The NFLPA's executive director, Ed Garvey, was a sharp-edged
Wisconsin lawyer who made an issue out of Rozelle's supposed
neutrality, arguing that the executive paid by the owners couldn't be
viewed as an impartial observer. This in itself was heresy to some
owners. At one negotiating session, when the NFLPA's president Bill
Curry was arguing the same point, an owner jumped up and said,
“Damnit, don't be telling us Rozelle's not neutral. We pay him damn well
to be neutral.”
Though Garvey and the union were demonized by some owners, the

NFLPA was never as radical as the Major League Baseball Players
Association, a fact that became apparent when the ex-Brown Bernie
Parrish tried to pursue a consortium of all three sports into a huge
athletes union. “I talked to Jimmy Hoffa and the Teamsters,” said
Parrish. “They were interested in representing us if we could bring the
sports together. But when we had the meeting of the representatives
from all the sports, the football players screwed it up. As some baseball
players told me, ‘Football players act like owners.’ So it didn't happen.”
But the NFLPA was unified enough, by the spring of 1974, to strike.
Among the demands put forth by the Players Association were
elimination of the option clause and Rozelle Rule; elimination of the
draft; and guaranteed salaries. But this was, in a way, assuring that there
would be no bargaining at all. The draft and the Rozelle Rule were
viewed as sacrosanct by the league's owners, general managers, and
coaches, their existence the very cornerstone of the NFL system.
The union held firm through the first two weeks of exhibitions, but by
August 13, when a federal mediator ordered a two-week “cooling-off
period,” the veterans voted to honor the called truce and return to camp.
The strike officially ended on August 29, but the opposition was
essentially crushed the moment the players came into camp. “It was a
long drawn-out strike,” explained the Bills’ Reggie McKenzie, “and our
side lost.”
NFLPA president Bill Curry would admit later that the players
association's list of “demands,” which numbered fifty-seven in March
and had reached ninety-three by the summer, was “a terrible mistake….
We came off arrogant.” Two days after the players voted to end the
strike, Bill Curry was waived by the Houston Oilers.
The NFLPA decided to carry its dispute through the courts (where
Mackey v. NFL would attempt to overturn the Rozelle Rule) and the
National Labor Relations Board (where the union would press for a
federal mediator) and returned to the playing field.
But in the broader context of professional sports, where athletes in the
’70s began to enjoy wide-ranging improvements, from higher pay and
better working conditions to free agency and more autonomy, the
players in the NFL were still behind the times. They were victimized by a

variety of factors, including the merger's elimination of competition for
players and the owners’ intransigence in collective bargaining. The
standoff created a tectonic tension that would take the better part of the
next two decades to resolve.
For the owners, the headaches came in pairs. In addition to the player
strike in the summer of 1974, there was the advent of another upstart
league, the World Football League. Founded a year earlier by Gary
Davidson, who'd launched the American Basketball Association and
World Hockey Association, the twelve-city WFL began play in the
summer of 1974 with a midweek playing schedule and a midsummer-tolate-fall season. Populated with owners like Toronto's John Bassett, who
had been interested in owning NFL franchises, the league signed a TV
deal with the independent sports network TVS, and began raiding NFL
rosters.
The WFL's biggest immediate impact may have been in bringing about
the dissolution of the Dolphins’ back-to-back champions. Even as the
Dolphins were winning Super Bowls VII and VIII, team owner Joe
Robbie was penurious with raises. Reluctant to negotiate with stars Larry
Csonka, Jim Kiick, and Paul Warfield, each of whom had one more year
remaining on his contract, Robbie kept putting off negotiations. In midMarch, the WFL held its draft of bargaining rights to active NFL players,
and Csonka, Kiick, and Warfield were selected by Bassett's franchise. In
late March, the three signed a collective three-year contract for more
than $3 million, to begin in the 1975 season, after the three Dolphins
had fulfilled their contracts, each ending in 1974. Other players signed
as well, and their lame-duck years in the NFL were often unpleasant.
Paul Brown was so angered by star linebacker Bill Bergey's defection that
he traded him prior to the 1974 season, though Bergey still had two
years remaining on his Bengals contract.
But the new league was quickly in trouble, its first season marred by
reports of inflated attendance figures and unpaid bills. The league
champion Birmingham Americans had their uniforms repossessed in the
locker room after winning the WFL's first championship.
The league returned in 1975 as a reorganized entry, assisted by the

infusion of NFL talent. Csonka, Kiick, and Warfield seemed dispirited,
consigned to a sinking ship. Gone were the wild uniforms and gaudy
trappings of 1974 and, after the twelfth week of its second season, gone
was the WFL.
The summer of 1974 would also mark the end of the career of John
Unitas. His first season with the Chargers had been inglorious, as he
tutored rookie Dan Fouts and took a pounding behind a porous Chargers
line. For longtime fans, Unitas never looked entirely comfortable fading
back in gold pants and the powder-blue jersey of the Chargers. The end
came on a summer Sunday when Unitas, suffering from a sprained leg
and ankle, decided he could no longer move well enough to justify
continuing.
Even at the end, he displayed the love of the game that marked so
many great ones. “If I could have gotten a leg transplant, I'd play
another thirty years,” he said. “But I couldn't move anymore. The way it
was, it was like standing in the middle of a road and saying, ‘Okay,
Buick, run me down.’ ”
At the dawn of the ’70s, the glamour of the quarterback position was
at an all-time high—due in large part to the exploits of Unitas and
Namath—but the retirement of Unitas would mark the beginning of the
end of that era. The Chiefs’ Len Dawson, the prototypical embodiment of
onfield cool, retired after the 1975 season, along with the Redskins’
Sonny Jurgensen. Namath's exit came two years later, after an
ineffectual final season with the Rams. Already by 1974, Namath's
physical decay had taken on a ritualistic aspect, nearly gothic in its
gruesome fascination. He would strap on his heavy Lenox Hill derotation
brace, limp out to the field, and then attempt to recapture his old
powers. Laboring to get out from under center, he took mincing steps,
gingerly setting up, completely vulnerable when the protection
collapsed. That he played gamely on through the punishment only made
his teammates feel worse. “He's helpless back there, a sitting duck,” said
teammate Steve Tannen. “He can't scramble out of trouble, and now he
can't even fall right.”
Quarterback remained the most important position on the football
field, but it lost some of its mystique, as play-calling responsibilities
gradually moved to the sidelines and press box. The rise of more

complex and better-disguised coverages and zones meant that recognizing
the defense would often become more important than anticipating it.
The game had grown more complex, and some quarterbacks were
privately more comfortable with not having the play-calling duties.

There was another reason for the decline of quarterbacks’ relative
stature, and that was the rise of conservative ground-based attacks
throughout the league. A record ten rushers ran for over 1,000 yards in
1973, when the Dolphins averaged more than 210 yards rushing per
game. There were fewer thrills in those bruising attacks, but the men
who provided it—Larry Csonka, Franco Harris, Larry Brown—were
becoming the biggest stars of the decade. And in the mid-’70s, none were
bigger than O. J. Simpson, Buffalo's star running back, who broke Jim
Brown's single-season rushing record in 1973, eclipsing Brown's 1,863
yards by busting for 200 in the final game, a win over the New York
Jets.
On the field, Simpson was a beautifully fluid runner, with a sixth sense
for avoiding the big hit, stepping lightly, spinning away from oncoming
tacklers and sluicing through the gaps opened up by his offensive line,
nicknamed “The Electric Company” (because, they boasted, “we turn on
the Juice”). Off the field, Simpson was viewed not just as a great athlete
but as an examplar of the egalitarian world of sports. Running through
airports for Hertz rental cars, he became the first black celebrity to be
featured in a national corporate ad campaign. Sports Illustrated named
him runner-up for their Sportsman of the Year award in 1975 (Pete Rose
won the honor). In a mid-’70s poll of grade-schoolers, commissioned by
Ladies’ Home Journal, Simpson was voted the most admired figure, by
both boys and girls. He played a romantic lead opposite Elizabeth
Montgomery in the police thriller A Killing Affair, one of the first
instances of interracial romance depicted on television. He was breaking
down barriers for blacks because he'd been accepted as an unthreatening
superstar, a fully assimilated black man whose genial, positive presence
carried none of the political, black-consciousness baggage of Jim Brown.
As had so often been the case in sports, the glory and fame enjoyed by
one black served to obscure the injustices still visited upon many of the
rest.
On the sidelines and in club offices, there was scant black

representation in the league. Rozelle had brought in two blacks at the
league office, Charlie Jackson as a security liaison and Buddy Young to
handle player issues, but they were the exceptions. Among executives,
coaches, and scouts, black faces were rare, with just five black assistants
in the league in 1973. At a time when nearly 50 percent of the league's
players were black, a black center had never started a game in the
National Football League, and for years Willie Lanier was the only black
middle linebacker.
For many of the other black stars in the NFL in the ’70s, Simpson's
success was the exception that proved the rule. There was virtually no
off-field endorsement money, not merely on a national level but even in
the city in which they lived, where everything from car signings to
speeches to Boy Scout troops seemed to go to white players.
“I'm a premier receiver, they say, or a premier this and that,” said the
Chiefs’ Otis Taylor in 1972. “But I'm a black man. I can't express myself,
I can't do anything. People always ask me what I've endorsed. I haven't
even done a dog food commercial, and that's pretty sorry for a guy who
would be so happy to do one he'd eat the dog food.”
In some league cities, housing barriers came down, reluctantly, due to
the pressure exerted by football players. Mel Renfro had to file a lawsuit
before he could integrate a section of North Dallas; the Cowboys
supported him, with a great deal of reluctance. Bobby Bell of the Chiefs
looked at “maybe 200 houses” before he was able to integrate the
affluent Overland Park section of Johnson County, across the Missouri
state line into Kansas.“When they found I was moving in, they called a
neighborhood association meeting,” remembered Bell. “So I went to the
meeting. Of course, who they were meeting about was me. So I show up
and say, ‘I'm here for the meeting.’ Guess what? All of a sudden they
decided the meeting just got canceled.”
By 1974, the most interesting division in football was the AFC Central,
where Paul Brown's past, present, and future were tangled up in a series
of incestuous rivalries. Games against his former team in Cleveland took
on the aspect of crusades. And there were perhaps no fiercer rivals on
opposing sidelines than Brown and his old antagonist Sid Gillman.
Gillman took over a woeful 1-13 Houston squad in the middle of 1973,
and won Coach of the Year honors after turning it into a dangerous 7-7

squad in 1974. That season included two galling upsets of the Bengals,
each of which left Gillman looking ten years younger and Brown in a
fouler mood than usual. The rising power in the league was in
Pittsburgh, where the Steelers were coached by Chuck Noll, who had
played for Brown at Cleveland, serving as one of the team's messenger
guards shuttling in plays from the sidelines. While Noll spoke admiringly
of his old coach, it was clear that he had major philosophical differences
with Brown in his handling of football teams. Noll felt that calling plays
“emasculates your quarterback. It's for coaches who want to be
quarterbacks. Paul Brown's the oldest quarterback in the league.”
The Steelers’ real renaissance began in 1969, when they hired the
thirty-seven-year-old Noll, the brawny, taciturn defensive specialist who
had most recently been Don Shula's top assistant in Baltimore. Surveying
the lack of talent in his first team, Noll made a similar call to the one
made a decade earlier by Tom Landry. “In 1969, we decided we had to
do certain things technically to win, and we decided to do them then,
even though we knew some of the personnel couldn't do it. In other
words, instead of adapting the system to the players, we just installed
our system. Then we set out to fill our team through the draft.”
In 1969, after identical 1-13 seasons, the Steelers and the Bears held a
coin flip for the right to select first in the 1970 draft. Pittsburgh won the
flip, and selected raw, strong-armed quarterback Terry Bradshaw out of
Louisiana Te ch.
While computers were now being used by virtually everyone in
football (save the maverick Raiders, who had developed their own
system and criteria under Al Davis), there was still a lack of league-wide
understanding over two key questions: why players who had excelled at
major-college football might not be successful in the pros, and which
standouts who played against lesser college competition could excel.
After Nebraska won its second straight national title in 1971, three
Cornhuskers were first-round picks in the 1972 draft, but none of them
—Jerry Tagge, Jeff Kinney, and Larry Jacobsen—enjoyed stellar pro
careers.
The Steelers erased forty years of futility with a string of almost
omniscient drafts between 1969 and 1974, drafting Joe Greene,
Bradshaw, Franco Harris, and Lynn Swann in the first round, Jack Ham

and Jack Lambert in the second, Mel Blount in the third, and John
Stallworth and Mike Webster in the fourth. Each man wound up in the
Hall of Fame.
After Franco Harris's “Immaculate Reception” to win the 1972
divisional playoff with Oakland, Pittsburgh advanced to the playoffs
again in 1973, but between injuries and a burgeoning quarterback
controversy, the club never had the look of a team that could challenge
for the title. In 1974, a more mature Steeler unit rolled to a 10-3-1 mark
and glided to an easy first-round playoff win over Simpson and the Bills,
the same weekend that the Raiders were ending Miami's three-year run
with an epic 28–26 win. The spent Raiders had little left the following
week, and Pittsburgh won easily in Oakland, to advance to their firstever NFL championship appearance.
Two weeks later, the Steelers took the title stifling the three-time
Super Bowl–losing Vikings, 16–6, on a cold, drizzly day in New Orleans.
Afterward Art Rooney, chomping on his ever-present stogie and peering
serenely behind his Coke-bottle glasses, raised the Lombardi trophy
presented to him by Pete Rozelle, who was moved to tears by the gravity
of the occasion. The win began a string of four titles in six years for the
Pittsburgh team, which would prove just as dominant in its era as the
Packers had been in the ’60s.
Though the beginning of the ’70s would be ruled by the Dolphins, and
the end by the Steelers, the decade as a whole belonged to the Dallas
Cowboys. They were the league's most visible, respected, resented, and
imitated team, a success financially, commercially, even aesthetically.
Throughout the decade, on Monday Night Football, on Thanksgiving
afternoons, on CBS's Sunday pregame show The NFL Today, in nearly
every playoff season, and five of the decade's Super Bowls, the Cowboys
were omnipresent.
Dallas was the team that best reflected Rozelle's ethic of corporate
excellence, and the fact that his oldest friend in the sport—and closest
ally in league meetings—was the Cowboys’ Tex Schramm was not lost on
the other owners. “If there's one team that's going to get a break,” said
Al Davis, “it's Dallas. On the officials’ calls, on the scheduling, on the
Competition Committee, on everything else relating to league matters.”

But it wasn't merely perception or favoritism. With the exception of a
one-year absence in 1974, Landry's team went to the playoffs every year
from 1966 to 1983. And in a competitive NFC, featuring the Vikings,
Redskins, and Rams, the Cowboys would represent the NFC in five of the
ten Super Bowls of the ’70s. The teams were smarter, faster, and more
disciplined than the competition, the offensive and defensive schemes
more complex, the coaching more consistent.
In the ’70s, though, it was what the Cowboys did off the field that
most clearly set them apart from their competition. Schramm's creation
of the Dallas Cowboys Cheerleaders in 1972 brought a measure of
unabashed sexuality into the game. The clean, polished Texas beauties,
attired in hot pants and halter tops, were introduced in 1972 and
became nationally famous in Super Bowl X three seasons later (when
CBS producer Chuck Milton said “we wanted to give fans a little sex with
their violence”). By 1977, they'd become pinup heroines to rival Farrah
Fawcett, inspiring their own calendar and made-for-TV movie.
The team's star was Roger Staubach, the Naval Academy's Heisman
Trophy–winning Vietnam vet and born-again Christian who portrayed a
selfconsciously wholesome image, and embodied his team's simultaneous
embrace of corporate soundness and artistic style. Bright, daring, with a
scrambler's electric moves and a gambler's eye for the big break,
Staubach epitomized his team and his age just as completely as Otto
Graham did his, and just like Graham, Staubach was criticized for being
merely an on-field adjunct to his head coach's machinations. Landry
drove the Cowboys to nine playoff appearances in the decade of the ’70s.
It was clear that Paul Brown was right: the future of football would come
from the sidelines; the field generals of the Unitas, Dawson, and Namath
ilk were a dying breed.
On the field Staubach was cool and calm yet flashy, an expert
scrambler who was dangerous in the open field. Out of uniform, he
became a kind of conservative icon, a Fellowship of Christian Athletes
member who insisted on making a point of his belief in the American
way. Yet there was a stubbornly headstrong quality to Staubach, at once
proud and vain. Around 1975, he took to the stylistic flourish of cutting
his jersey sleeves at the stripes, so more of his arms were bare. On an
NFL Today pregame piece, Staubach took pains to tell Phyllis George, “I

like sex as much as Joe Namath does. I just have it with one woman.”
Even though he chafed at Landry's play calling at times, Staubach
remained a good soldier, an organization man. And the organization was
running at peak efficiency. Despite annually drafting near the bottom of
each round, the Cowboys constantly replenished their roster. After
missing the playoffs for the first time in nine years in 1974, the
Cowboys’ 1975 draft featured twelve players who made the active roster,
and led the club to the Super Bowl.
The team's success created impossible expectations and some players
questioned the fans’ loyalty, prompting Staubach's famous crack that
“Cowboy fans love you, win or tie.” But those fans spanned the country.
By 1977, the Cowboys were responsible for a quarter of all team
merchandise sold by NFL Properties. Their self-published newspaper, The
Dallas Cowboys Official Weekly, had a circulation of 100,000, half of it
outside Texas.
In 1978, after the Cowboys season, an NFL films producer named Bob
Ryan was overseeing the Cowboys’ highlights film, one of the routine
duties for the studio in the off-season, when it handled all twenty-eight
team highlights videos. Ryan had noticed that at every road game in
which the Cowboys played, there was a significant portion of fans
rooting for the visitors. In putting together highlights of the team's 1978
season, which had ended with the Cowboys battling the Steelers, he
called Dallas “America's Team.” The name stuck, and only added fuel to
the fire. Like the Yankees in baseball, the Celtics in basketball, or
Howard Cosell in television, the Cowboys had become a galvanizing,
divisive presence, both the most-liked and most-disliked entry in its
field.
Writing in the Boston Globe, Leigh Montville argued,“The Dallas
Cowboys are the team I would put in the time capsule. If the dominant
sport of our generation has been pro football—and it has been—then the
Cowboys are the logical choice. No team better describes football and
stay-at-home Sundays of the past decade…. They are a team of efficiency
and controversy and rhinestone glitter. They have been the best
characterization of the pro football team imaginable.”

The Cowboys’ system generated numerous imitators, and the edge that
Dallas had over the competition had narrowed considerably. But
Schramm and Brandt had managed to keep the Dallas system a step or
two ahead of the competition. In the ’60s, Brandt was expert at
manipulating the levers of military service to Dallas's advantage, often
stashing a player in the National Guard rather than waive him to a
competitor.
Their use of computers in scouting had evolved and grown more
sophisticated. In addition to the standard measurables of height, weight,
and speed, the additional five characteristics that the Cowboys analyzed
in every football player, regardless of position—character, quickness,
competitiveness, mental alertness, and strength and explosion—had
remained constant, and was observed throughout the league. What had
changed, through extensive regression analysis, were the weights that
the computer gave to the numerical grade in each category. In 1965,
speed had counted for 14.64 percent of a tight end's total grade. The
next year it was dropped to 11 percent. In 1965, competitiveness was 7
percent of a tight end's grade, a year later it went up to 10.5 percent.
In the 1977 draft, Dallas traded up with the Seattle Seahawks (one of
two expansion clubs added in 1976) for the second pick, which they
used to select Tony Dorsett, the Heisman winner out of Pitt. Going into
the draft there was considerable debate about whether the bigger Ricky
Bell, tailback out of USC and Tampa Bay's top pick, was better than
Dorsett. But the Cowboys’ system rendered a clear verdict, predicting
that Dorsett would enjoy a much more successful career than Bell. Only
after Tampa Bay selected Bell did Dallas make the deal for the second
pick. In doing so, they added the NFL's Rookie of the Year and rolled to
a 12-2 regular season mark and their second world championship.
That 1977 season, though, was among the least compelling in the
league's history. Scoring was down, divisional races never heated up,
and despite the Cowboys’ popularity the overall level of play seemed
sluggish. Points per game had dropped from a high of 46.1 in 1965 to
34.4 in 1977, the lowest total in thirty-five years. Touchdowns per game
were down to 4.2, the lowest since 1940; touchdown passes were down
to 1.98, also the lowest since 1942. Even when the pitiful performance
of expansion teams Tampa Bay and Seattle were excluded, offense was in

a historic slump. The game felt more sterile than ever, and there were
far too many headlines like the one in Pro Football Weekly, following a
10–0 Washington win over Buffalo: “Dull Redskins Beat Even Duller
Bills.” As if that weren't enough, there was widespread criticism of
excessive violence in the game, and the alarming injury rate among
starting quarterbacks—six were knocked out of action in a single day—
only exacerbated the offensive drought.
Another thing that Rozelle had been fearing for a decade—the revival
of Major League Baseball's popularity—had come to pass. The Red Sox’
march through the 1975 season, and their classic World Series with the
Reds, had ignited the charge. But it was the dawn of free agency, and
George Steinbren-ner's arrogant, endlessly dramatic Yankees dynasty
that led to the sort of figures that distressed Rozelle.
The NFL's favored pollster, Louis Harris, presented some sobering
news in September 1977: “For the first time since 1968, more sports fans
in the country follow baseball than football. The margin may be only
one percentage point, but the trend is unmistakably in baseball's favor,
and quite significant for the fortunes of both games. When fans are asked
to name their favorite sport, they still opt for football by a slim 22–21
percent. It is clear that baseball has made a real comeback.” The parallel
was not lost on Rozelle that, just as football had surged ahead of
baseball at a time when that sport's offense was at a record low level in
the late ’60s, so did baseball's resurgence accompany a decline in scoring
and overall excitement in football in the mid-’70s.
Super Bowl XII revealed another painful lesson of the artificial turf era
— it's hard to stage a football gala indoors. The hermetically sealed
atmosphere of the first indoor setting, in the Louisiana Superdome,
squeezed what little life there was out of another largely forgettable
Super Bowl mismatch, with the Cowboys winning, 27–10, over the
Denver Broncos.
A few weeks after Super Bowl XII, Rozelle toasted his friend Schramm,
and they took their customary postseason fishing trip in the Caribbean.
But on this outing, there was more football discussed than usual. Both
men had reached the same conclusion: it was time to go back to the
drawing board; the game needed to be rescued from itself.

18

Air War

O

n December 28, 1975, Paul Brown led the Cincinnati Bengals onto
the field at Oakland Alameda-County Coliseum, to face the Oakland
Raiders in the divisional round of the AFC playoffs. The 1975 squad was
his best yet, qualifying for the playoffs for the third time in the team's
eight-year existence. Cincinnati went 11-3 in the regular season, losing
twice to the world champion Steelers (who routinely punished the fleet
Bengal receivers with bump-and-run coverage beneath a double zone),
but going 11-1 against the rest of their schedule to earn the AFC wild
card berth.
Cincinnati fell behind 31–14 before a late rally closed the gap to 31–
28. But the upset bid came up short; after choosing to punt from
midfield late in the game, the Bengals never got the ball back. Paul
Brown had coached 501 football games in 41 seasons at the pro, college,
and high school levels. And, as he confided to a friend, “I never got used
to losing.”
Four days after the loss, on New Year's Day 1976, before settling down
in his home to watch Ohio State take on UCLA in the Rose Bowl, Brown
called Bengals public relations director Al Heim at home. Then Brown
quietly dictated the press release of his own resignation, announcing that
he was retiring as head coach, effective immediately, adding the news
that he would be succeeded by his well-liked assistant Bill “Tiger”
Johnson. Though Brown would remain as the team's general manager in
complete charge of football operations, his historic coaching career had
ended.

“Take it from there,” he told Heim, who was dispatched to inform the
media, on a day when widespread staffing of the nation's bowl games
and preparation for the coming weekend's conference championships
guaranteed it would receive the least possible amount of coverage.
Brown provided no additional statements and called no press
conferences.

Though he retired from coaching, Paul Brown remained the president
and general manager of the Bengals, and kept his seat on the NFL's
Competition Committee. The committee was one of the by-products of
the merger and Rozelle's determination to return the focus to on-field
issues in the ’70s. The group was handpicked by Rozelle, and given the
mission of “recommending all changes in rules in the area of on the field
competition.” The committee was chaired by Tex Schramm and, for
much of the ’70s, included Brown, Don Shula, and Al Davis. Staff
oversight was handled initially by Jim Kensil and then, after Kensil left
to become general manager of the Jets in 1977, by new executive
director Don Weiss.
In the literal, zero-sum world of pro football, where as Shula aptly put
it, “You start with having to win, and you work back,” the Competition
Committee operated on some different theoretical plane, equal parts
brainstorming session, Rules Committee, and think tank. Armed with a
ream of statistics, and separated from the often ponderous financial
details of the main owners meeting, the committee would meet for ten to
fourteen days in late February and early March, then prepare a set of
recommendations to present to the league's annual meeting each year.
For the gruff visionary Schramm, the big picture of accelerating and
accentuating the game's action was of primary importance. He ran the
committee with a kind of bullheadedness, arguing incessantly with his
peers through the day, then drinking with them much of the night. The
group brought a unique range of experiences to the job: Schramm,
Brown, and Davis all owned parts of teams; Brown, Davis, and Shula had
all been coaches, and had all spent time in the more wide-open AFL;
Schramm and Brown both had been raised on the Bell and Rozelle credo
to “Think league first.” And Schramm and Davis, for their part, had
found common cause because both were nearly addicted to the
competitive aspects of the game. “Once Al and I were discussing the

word ‘devious,’ ” said Don Shula. “He thought it was a compliment.”
But the strong personalities and shifting alliances added a creative
dynamism to the group, and it wielded immense power. Though the
committee's recommendations were only that, they were in fact
approved more than 95 percent of the time by the league's owners.
For much of the ’70s, the committee grappled with the decline in
passing and scoring. Some rules brought unforeseen consequences: when
the hash-marks were moved nearer the center of the field in 1972, it did
open the offense up to pass to both sides of the field. But it also made
field goals easier (the hashmarks now perfectly aligned with the
goalposts) and gave defenses an easier time disguising their coverages.
The zone defenses that swept the league forced teams into shorter passes
—running backs dominated the receiving leaders, and the average yards
gained per completion dipped below 13 for the first time in 36 seasons.
In 1974, more sweeping changes were instituted: a sudden death
period was added for tie games in the regular season, meaning that the
seven tie games of 1973 were reduced to a single tie in 1974 (if neither
team scored after a full overtime period in the regular season, the game
ended in a tie). Because field goals had become so common (an all-time
high of nearly three per game in 1973), the goalposts were moved to the
back of the end zone (a rule that had the added appeal of making the
game safer, since there would be less congestion on the goal line). To
further discourage field goals, failed kicks attempted outside the 20yard-line would have the ball returned to the line of scrimmage instead
of the 20.
For Paul Brown, whose Bengals teams were smallish and not
particularly physical, one of the crucial issues was the abuse suffered by
receivers running their routes. Prior to 1974, receivers could be hit until
the ball left the quarterback's hands. The rule played into the hands of
the double-zone defense, in which the two cornerbacks played tight
bump-and-run coverage on their assigned wide receivers, secure in the
knowledge that if a receiver got by, a safety on that side of the field
would be able to punish him more. The zone began with Shula's
Dolphins and later made its way around the league, and few teams
played it better than the Steelers. “I call it ‘the bump-hit-grab-roll-blockcatch-funnel and run,’ ” cracked Brown prior to the committee's meeting

in 1974.
A rule instituted that season put greater restrictions on a defender's
ability to bump, limiting a defender to a single “chuck” on a receiver
once he was three yards beyond the line of scrimmage. In the short term,
this meant that receivers were no longer subjected to routine and
constant hacking as they went down the field.
In practice, the Competition Committee's work often attained a clean
elegance. The skimpy tie-breaking rules for divisional and conference
standings of 1970 were replaced with a more intricate, rational system
in 1974. When the league's rotating playoff site system was exposed,
when Miami had to take its 15-0 record on the road to Pittsburgh for the
1972 AFC title game, the committee instituted a system that seeded
teams according to record. In addition to preventing instances in which a
conference's two best teams were drawn against each other in the first
round (as happened with Miami and Kansas City in 1971), it also gave
teams more of an incentive to play well late in the regular season, even
after clinching a division title.
Along the way, Schramm would push through numerous minor
improvements to the game: the field would become more uniform, and
safer, with foam pylons replacing the flags at the corner of each end
zone; a six-foot white line bordered the entire field, which kept coaches
and players on the sideline further from the action, and also made outof-bounds plays easier to spot; a play clock was added behind each end
zone, allowing both the quarterback and fans to know how much time
was left before the ball had to be snapped; in 1974, the referee, the head
of the officiating crew, was equipped with a microphone, so that he
could announce to the entire stadium (and the TV audience) a penalty,
providing clarification if necessary.
In addition to the small rules changes, Schramm was the main
architect of the larger changes. “Virtually all the major changes in the
league were initiated by Tex,” said Weiss.“It continues to amaze me how
he can take an idea and formulate it. He has as fertile a mind as anybody
in our league and the great ability to grasp all facets of a situation. I
don't think anybody in the league is more familiar with all aspects of the
operation than Tex.”

Not all new ideas came from within the Competition Committee.
Throughout the summer of 1976, Jim Kensil spent much of his free time
at the dining room table in his house at Massapequa, building a series of
charts and formulas that he wouldn't finish until the fall, a blueprint for
an entirely new way of scheduling.

Whereas the league had previously made do with a pure rotation formula—home-and-home within the division, plus a cycle of conference
and nonconference foes that would rotate each year—Kensil envisioned
something else, a way that would not only increase the league's desire
for premium match-ups but further the vision first put forth by Bert Bell
in the late ’40s.
Instead of merely playing other excellent teams when the rotation
called for it, Kensil's schedule envisioned that the league's division
winners from one season would play every other division winner the
following season. Similarly, the league's fourth-place teams would play
five games against other fourth-place finishers.
He called his plan “position scheduling,” and in an undated memo to
Rozelle, probably written in early November, Kensil wrote:
If the 1976 season were to end with the current standings and position

scheduling were put into effect for 1977, the team's basic schedules would be set by
looking up a given team on the chart below and reading vertically for its home-andhome opponents and horizontally for its single-game opponents.

There would, of course, be a system for breaking ties in the standings.

Also teams in a four-team division would have only 11 basic games, as would fifthplace teams in a “five.”

A system would be worked out, along competitive lines, to schedule the additional
games needed.

It was not a coincidence that the idea came at a time when the league was

preparing to discuss a new round of TV contracts.

On November 5, 1976, Rozelle batted out a confidential letter to Art Modell and

Chargers owner Gene Klein, long-standing members of the NFL's broadcasting
Committee, and shared for the first time the outlines of Kensil's plan. Laying out the

problem of the present scheduling system and the limited number of attractive
match-ups, Rozelle wrote, “The best solution would appear to be ‘stacking’ the

schedule. This would be achieved by pitting strong against strong and weak against

weak (based on previous year's standings) for the out of division games. … It would
ensure a great increase in attractive games for TV, but also give us the strong
likelihood of fantastic divisional races with many more teams staying in contention
longer!”

At the same time, a strong push developed in the league toward moving from a

fourteen- to a sixteen-game regular season schedule, reducing the preseason
schedule from six games to four. Rozelle added, “In the event the clubs voted to go

16-4, it would of course mean additional TV revenue. And one of the major
objections to a 16 game regular season schedule (the weak having two more games

to flounder and races getting locked up too early) would be greatly diminished by
the ‘stacked’ schedule.” Rozelle added, in passing, “Kensil literally drools over the
large increase in ‘attractive’ games the stacked sked would create.”

At the league's spring meetings in March, the sixteen-game schedule was approved,

along with a modified form of the stacked schedule, less severe than the one
originally envisioned by Kensil, but it still ensured more attractive match-ups and

offered the promise of increased competition. Besides the stacked schedule and two

extra weeks of meaningful regular season games, there was one other element that
the league would offer, an addition conceived by Don Weiss, who pointed out that

in each of the three previous seasons, a 10-4 team had failed to qualify for the
playoffs. By adding a single wild card to each conference, argued Weiss, the league

could add an extra weekend of playoffs, reward each of the division champions a

week to rest players, and keep more teams in contention for playoff spots later in
the season, all without significantly watering down the lineup of teams making the
playoffs.

“The idea of parity or competitive balance or whatever you want to call it is behind
just about everything that the league talked about during the ’60s and ’70s,” said

Weiss.“To try to achieve better balance, keep people in the races longer, and stuff
like that. The combination of that and the smaller divisions, and the schedule

devised to make the schedule more competitive and to give the weaker teams
something of a break. That was all part of it, sure. And that was the end result—the
end result was making your league as competitive as possible.”

With all that on the table, Rozelle went into negotiations for the next TV contract
confident that he could achieve a sizable increase, though he had masterfully kept

expectations low, pointing out the problems in the industry and the difficulty that
CBS and NBC were having competing with ABC, whose prime-time lineup was
dominating television at the time.

The ensuing deal, announced in October 1977, threw everyone for a loop: a four-

year, $576 million contract that the New York Times would describe succinctly as
“the biggest deal in television history.” It was not merely that each team's annual

revenue from TV would double, from just over $2 million to $5.2 million. For the

first time, NFL teams would be earning more revenue from the rights to telecast
their games than from the ticket sales of the games themselves.

This, however, was only half the job. A few weeks after returning from his fishing
trip with Rozelle, Tex Schramm flew to Hawaii and the Competition Committee

meeting armed with a mandate to initiate the most sweeping changes in a
generation, all in the interest of stimulating offense. In 1977, defenders had been

limited to just one “chuck,” or hit on receivers; when the 1978 Competition

Committee met, the rule restricted that further, limiting contact to one hit within

five yards of the line of scrimmage. After that point, receivers could not legally be

hit until a quarterback's pass had arrived. What this would mean in the short term
for the league was more unfettered movement of receivers downfield. What it

meant in the long term—a revolutionary change in the way the game was played,
coached, and contested—wouldn't become clear for a few years. There was little
noticeable impact in 1978. Teams that were already passing (like the Chargers,

where coach Don Coryell was carrying the torch of Gillman's offensive innovation)

continued to do so, but most teams began the 1978 season continuing to play
relatively conservative football.

By the end of the season, though, the new rules were beginning to take hold.
Though the Steelers remained an intimidating, physical team, they won two more
titles in 1978 and 1979 with a much more diversified attack, which relied less on
Franco Harris's runs and more on Terry Bradshaw's throws to receivers Lynn Swann

and John Stallworth. The Steelers’ third and fourth Super Bowl wins—35–31 over

the Cowboys in Miami and a rousing 31–19 defeat of the Rams in Pasadena—were

wide-open affairs, much more consistent with the freewheeling game the league
wanted to portray.

By 1980, the change was dramatic. Teams were passing 47 percent of the time (as
compared to just 38 percent in 1977) and scoring was up to 41 points per game

(from 34.4 in 1977). The end of the bump-and-run, combined with the liberalized
pass-blocking rules, changed the mind-set of defenses as well. Teams switched to a
more aggressive, gambling style. “We preach to our kids, ‘Don't worry about getting

beat on the bomb,’ ” said the Jets’ defensive coordinator Joe Gardi during the 1981
season. “Offenses can put so many points on the board, that 14 points aren't usually
going to beat you. Two-three turnovers will make up for it. Ten years ago, giving

up a bomb was disastrous. Not now.”

The obsession with speed was further encouraged, because now it was easier than
ever to utilize it. Six track sprinters or hurdlers were taken in the first round of the
1980 draft, two of whom (world-class sprinters Lam Jones and Curtis Dickey) were
among the first five overall selections.

Instead of a two-yard cushion, defenders were giving the fastest receivers a four- or

five-yard cushion at the line. As this phenomenon played itself out through the

league, it led to developments that would become crucial in the next phase of the
sport: double-teams on the most dangerous wide receivers left single coverage on

tight ends down the field and running backs coming out of the backfield, and the

larger cushion given to most quick receivers, whether in man or zone coverage,
meant that teams had more room to throw underneath coverages, or hit wide

receivers on quick slant routes. With the new rules in place, it was only a matter of
time before someone showed how best to take full advantage of them.

When Paul Brown announced that Tiger Johnson would succeed him in 1976, no
one was more stunned than Bill Walsh, Brown's prized offensive assistant who had

been constructing the team's game plans and calling plays, without credit, for many
years.

Walsh had grown up in Los Angeles, watching Southern Cal and UCLA games, and
the aerial theatrics of the Rams’ teams of the late ’40s and ’50s. Neither his crisp

manner nor soft-spoken confidence could conceal the fact that he was a man of

ambition. Those who knew him best realized he was one of the brightest minds in

football. Even Brown, not one to shower praise on his assistants, recognized Walsh's
skills. “He has ideas,” Brown said approvingly, to his son, Mike.

Walsh had spent the 1966 season as an assistant with the Raiders, before leaving.

He admired Al Davis, and his concepts about football, but he couldn't thrive in the

Raiders’ one-dimensional environment. “He is a person whose existence is
consumed with what he does, and it's too much,” said Walsh of Davis. “And only a

few men could stay with it.” Walsh was not one of them. He left the Raiders job and
went to work as the head coach for the semipro San Jose Toros. In 1968, when

starting the Bengals, Brown called on Walsh and eventually ceded almost total
control of the passing attack, game plan, and play calling to the lanky, prematurely
white-haired Californian.

Like a grad student drawing from various great thinkers to devise a new synthesis,

Walsh borrowed from his earlier experiences. For a string of talented young

quarterbacks and a young offensive line, Walsh brought elements of Gillman
(putting more receivers into routes, spreading out the field horizontally), Davis (an

unpredictable mix of play calling that isolated an opponent's weakness and
exploited it at the most crucial times), and his own techniques that he'd gained

from years of football (like moving a flanker in closer to the tight end, then sending
him across the field on shallow drag routes that gave defenses fits). Walsh also
developed, out of necessity, a habit of using shorter drops for his quarterbacks,

since Cincinnati's green offensive line often couldn't hold blocks long enough to

accommodate the deeper drops and longer setups of some of Gillman's and Davis's
favorite patterns.

While Brown was still nominally the man in charge of play calling for the

Bengals, by 1971 the plays were actually being called by Walsh, from up in the

booth overlooking the stadium. Cincinnati was a stylish, finesse team that used its
quickness, plenty of motion, crossing patterns, misdirection running plays, and an
update of the Browns’ delayed draw, a play in which the quarterback dropped back
as if to pass, then handed the ball up to his blocking back.

As the Bengals rose to a series of successes in the early ’70s, Walsh waited for
someone to notice and give him a shot as a head coach. He was bewildered when

no calls came, but consoled himself with the idea that when Brown did step down,
he was the logical man to replace him.

So when he heard the news that he'd been passed over for the head coaching job for
Bill Johnson, Walsh was, in his own words, “an emotional wreck.” He concluded

then that he would never be a head coach if he stayed in Cincinnati. As he put it, “I
knew I now had to leave to have a career.”

Just days after Brown's announcement, Bill Walsh sat in Paul Brown's office, with
Paul and Mike Brown, and tried to explain himself.

“I have to leave,” said Walsh, soon in tears over the implication.

Brown was taken aback by the unabashed emotionalism and argued that Walsh

couldn't leave, because he was under contract in Cincinnati. Bereft and still
weeping, Walsh got up and left the office.

“You wait here,” said Brown, sternly. “You wait!”

But Walsh was already out the door, and on his way out of Cincinnati. It would be
weeks before he began to learn the full nature of Brown's efforts to keep him.
Numerous teams had called, inquiring about Walsh, and Brown had given each
team a negative recommendation.

In San Francisco, Lou Spadia called after Dick Nolan left in 1975, curious if the

young assistant from the area might be the right man for the 49ers job. “Paul
Brown told me,” said Spadia, “that, ‘If I were you, I wouldn't touch him with a ten-

foot pole. He'll wreck your team.’ ” Sid Gillman, about to embark on his last year as

head coach in Houston in 1974, had called Cincinnati in the spring of 1974, to see

if Walsh would work for him one year as an assistant and heir apparent, with the
understanding that he could have the head coaching job in 1975. Brown declined to
give permission for Gillman to talk to Walsh, then never even told Walsh about the
opportunity.

After leaving Cincinnati in 1976, Walsh immediately helped transform the Chargers

into one of the league's most potent offenses, and soon wound up back in the Bay
Area, as the head coach at Stanford, where the undermanned Cardinal enjoyed

surprising success for two seasons. The 49ers, who'd just fired their fourth coach in
three years, took another look at Walsh and hired him prior to the 1979 season.

Finally receiving a chance as a head coach in the pros at age forty-seven, Walsh
would soon make up for lost time. His approach would initially strike players as

corporate. He used language in different ways, choosing to refer to what for
decades had been known as the playbook as “our inventory of plays.” The 49ers
didn't have pass patterns, they had “schematics.”

But there was also a component of his coaching philosophy, steeped in decades of

California consciousness raising, that was more humane than the standard, the

product of his years on the progressive campus at Stanford. What Walsh was
attempting was not merely a new way to run an offense, but a revolutionary new
way to coach a football team.

The 49ers’ starting quarterback in 1979 was lightly regarded Steve DeBerg, a six-

year veteran from Walsh's own alma mater, San Jose State, who had posted a 45.4
completion percentage in 1978, as the twenty-eighth-rated quarterback in the NFL.
With the offensive line he inherited a shambles, Walsh shortened DeBerg's drop-

back to three or five steps, and drilled him in a system in which each of his first

three reads would be on one side of the field, meaning the quarterback's primary

choices were within a narrower range of vision than in other offenses. With the

Walsh system of timed patterns and progressive reads, and painstaking work on
accelerating his drop-back, DeBerg completed 60 percent of his passes and San
Francisco rose from twenty-fifth to third in the NFL in passing yards.

And yet, at the end of that first season, Walsh was both fatigued and discouraged.

The 49ers went 2-14, just as they had in the previous season. DeBerg had proved a
credible quarterback, especially deft at ball-handling, but he exhibited neither the
touch nor the accuracy for the offense to maximize its effectiveness. And no amount

of strategic innovation could make up for the team's general lack of talent. “I had

no idea the team would be as bad as it was,”Walsh said.“It was almost as bad as the

Bengals were when we started the Bengals. So it goes without saying that I almost
failed. Because it was too big a task—insurmountable, impossible, insurmountable.”

Help was on the way. There are moments when the fortunes of a franchise pivot on
a single game, decision, trade, or play. The Colts’ fortunes rose on the price of a call
to free agent Johnny Unitas; the Rams had gone into a nearly decade-long nosedive

after choosing Jon Arnett instead of Jim Brown. And in the same way, the fortunes
of the 49ers were forever altered by a draft-day decision, this by another team.

The 1979 draft found the Dallas Cowboys preparing for the beginning of a new

era, with Roger Staubach nearing the end of his career. His understudy Danny
White, who'd come over after the demise of the WFL, was the heir apparent, and

the young Glenn Carano, an unpolished but physically gifted thrower from
University of Nevada–Las Vegas was seen as a potential diamond in the rough. In
the third round, as the Cowboys’ selection came up, Tom Landry looked at the

Cowboys’ master list, and did something he had rarely done in his nineteen years of
drafting. Instead of taking the top player on the Cowboys’ chart, he went “against

the board” and selected not the highest-rated player but the next-highest-ranked

one, a rangy tight end named Doug Cosbie, who would go on to enjoy a productive

career and provide further evidence that the Cowboys were able to find a diamond
in the rough.

On the next selection, the eighty-second San Francisco chose the very player who
had been on the top of the Cowboys’ board, the player Dallas had passed on
because, in Landry's words, “We don't really need another quarterback.”
His name was Joe Montana.

By New Year's Day in Dallas, when he sealed his collegiate legend by rallying Notre
Dame from a 34–12 deficit to defeat Houston in a freezing rainstorm in the Cotton
Bowl, Montana had already earned the attention of NFL scouts. He was smallish for

a quarterback, listed at 6-foot-1½, but barely a shade over 6-foot, with a spindly
build, shaggy hair, and a big nose. Wearing his helmet, eyes twinkling out above
the facemask, Montana occasionally resembled the pop crooner Barry Manilow. But

what he lacked in the superficial characteristics of a first-class athlete, he more than
made up for in the purest sense, in the area of touch, poise, and athletic instincts.

The team opened at 3-0 in 1980, before starting an eight-game losing streak, during

which Walsh turned the starting job over to Montana. The streak was snapped with

an ugly 12–0 win over the Giants in November, then followed with a 21–7 upset of

a good New England team. Next the New Orleans Saints came to town, and
scorched the San Francisco secondary en route to a 35–7 halftime lead. In the

second half, Montana led San Francisco all the way back, tying the game at 35 in

regulation, and leading them on a game-winning drive to prevail, 38–35, in
overtime.

The 49ers lost their last two games of the season, to wind up 6-10. “We knew we

had something,” said Walsh of his realization of Montana's potential. “But we were,
even at that time, who were we to think that we were gonna go anywhere? I mean,
we had lost eight straight games in the second year. We might have thought

somebody was gonna have a great quarterback, whoever gets this job next, you
know.”

In Montana's precocious maturity and quicksilver elusiveness there were the

seeds of greatness. Walsh was able to capitalize more quickly than most of his

competitors on the liberalized passing rules, using short drops, quick reads, and

timed patterns. Montana internalized the patterns so completely that he possessed

what Walsh would describe as “this inherent, instinctive, genetic” ability to see
receivers before they came open on a route, throwing the ball so it would arrive just

as the receiver came free. The system and the athletes complemented one another,
and Walsh's system would be labeled “the West Coast offense.”

The other distinctive characteristic of the West Coast offense was the “scripting” of
plays. It had begun in Cincinnati when Paul Brown, eager to get a sense of the next

day's game, would ask, “What are your openers?,” and Walsh would provide him
with a list of five or so plays that he expected to call at the beginning of the game,

a list he would only veer from in a specific down-and-distance situation like thirdand-short. By the time he was at San Diego, the script had grown to fifteen plays,

and most games the Chargers would exhaust that list before they did anything else.

In San Francisco, the script could stretch to twenty-five plays or more.“It helped our
players sleep at night,” said Walsh. “We could take the field without the butterflies
and hypertension, the wondering, because we had a plan.”

It also made the 49ers exceedingly difficult to defense. Since Landry began the

sophisticated charting of opponents’ offensive tendencies in the ’50s, much
defensive game planning involved sussing out a team's tendencies, patterns in
certain down-and-distance situations. But the 49ers’ script wreaked havoc with

tendencies, since so many play calls had been made prior to the game, irrespective
of down and distance.

In the third season, 1981, with three rookie starters in the secondary, the 49ers got

off to a 1-2 start, before winning twelve of their last thirteen regular season games,
to clinch home field throughout the playoffs. Montana's emerging favorite target
was a slow, lanky wide receiver named Dwight Clark, who had been a tenth-round

pick the same year that Montana went in the third round, and would catch eighty-

five passes during the regular season. After beating the Giants, 38–24, in their
opening playoff game, they played host to the Cowboys, still formidable, still

glamorous, and with a score to settle after a lopsided regular season loss in San
Francisco.

San Francisco seemed jittery during the rematch, giving up six turnovers, two of
which led to touchdowns. With 4:54 remaining, they trailed Dallas, 27–21. Then,

Montana led the 49ers on the thirteen-play drive that would solidify his pro legend.
With third-and-three on the Cowboys’ six-yard line, with 58 seconds to play,

Montana called a sprint-out pass. A blitz flushed him further out of the pocket as he
moved laterally toward the sideline. As he neared the boundary, Montana couldn't

see Clark, but he knew that Clark's route called for him to be in the back of the end
zone, moving in the same direction. An instant before running out of bounds he
threw a sharp, high ball toward the back corner of the end zone. Staying just inside

the end line, with cornerback Everson Walls shadowing him tightly, Clark leaped to
catch the ball, coming down with both feet in bounds. Afterward, the Cowboys

seemed stunned, and ungenerous.“Montana has to be the key,” said Landry.“There
really is nothing else there except the quarterback.”

The 49ers would head to the Super Bowl, where waiting for Walsh would be none

other than the Cincinnati Bengals, owned by Paul Brown, and resurgent themselves,

having rebounded from a 6-10 mark in 1980, under the guidance of second-year
coach Forrest Gregg.

The game was an uneven, if exciting affair, watched by a record crowd of 110

million Americans; bitterly cold weather across much of the country added to the

audience. The 49ers would win the world championship, 26–21, and in so doing
would provide the first glimpse of pro football's future.

Brown may have been grudging with praise to his competitors and former protégés,
but when he delivered it, the words were sincere. The following March, during a

break in the spring meetings, Brown saw Walsh and said hello. They talked for a

few minutes, and inevitably fell into talk of the previous Super Bowl. “I knew what

you were doing,” said Brown of Walsh's play calling. “I knew what you were doing
during that game … and I liked it.”

So did Pete Rozelle. Pro football had quelled baseball's resurgence, and made the
owners even richer. The game's offense and excitement had sprung back, its

competitive balance showed signs of returning. Both Super Bowl teams had gone 610 the previous season, meaning that there was hope, even for longtime doormats.
Not coincidentally, the sport's popularity rose to a new high.

Pro football's incursion into the mainstream of American popular culture was no

longer questioned, and infrequently challenged. In 1980, the League of Women

Voters scheduled two presidential debates between Jimmy Carter and Ronald
Reagan on Monday nights, before an outcry from the republic of football fans—as

well as a sober reconsideration on the part of realist political operatives—forced a
switch. (The single debate that occurred came on a Tuesday night.)

The 49ers-Bengals Super Bowl in Detroit had earned the highest Nielsen rating of
any sporting event in history, 49.1 with a 73.0 share, good numbers to bring into

the negotiation with the networks later in the spring. ABC's Roone Arledge would

describe sitting across from Rozelle during contract talks as having “about as much

clout as the Dalai Lama has dealing with the Chinese Army.” In February 1982,
Rozelle sat down with his ever-present gold-plated Dunhill lighter (which he would

tap lightly on a tabletop during the tensest moments of negotiations) and named his
terms. The ensuing five-year, $2.1 billion deal added further luster to Rozelle's
reputation, and that of pro football. With the new contract, each team's annual
revenues from TV grew from $5 million to $13 million.

Taken together, the triumphant Super Bowl and another record-breaking TV deal

marked another plateau in the sport's ascent. Offense had crept back up by the

1981 season, and though there were problems looming on the horizon, pro football
was securely ensconced as the number one spectator sport in America.

Pat Summerall would often see his friend Rozelle, at the height of his powers
during these years, and wonder how long the remarkable string might continue. “I

think he had visions during that period of time of, ‘Oh, boy, how much better can it

possibly get?’ He came down to the field before the game and it was like the Roman
emperor with his entourage and the guards and the chariots. You almost expected
the spears and swords to come at any minute.”

19

Under Siege

R

ozelle's perspective would never again seem quite so rosy, his
primacy never so complete. Within months of the new TV deal, the
dam broke and the NFL found itself beset on all sides, with crises, legal
defeats, scandals, and strikes. These weren't PR flaps that came and went
like Joe Namath's threatened retirement, but the result of deep-seated
problems and fissures within the league hierarchy that would plague the
NFL throughout the ’80s.
Yet it's worth noting that, for all the bad news that followed, at no time
during the decade was the NFL's standing as America's most popular
sport seriously challenged. The game's appeal was so broad, its
organizational savvy so far superior to that of its competitors that it
continued, to paraphrase the old Paul Brown maxim, “to run on its own
gas.” The game's crown jewels stayed relatively healthy: Monday Night
Football remained a perennial hit, even after Don Meredith's exit in 1978
and Howard Cosell's departure following the 1983 season. The Super
Bowl, already a high holy day in the American civic religion, became the
most important day in the calendar for the advertising industry. By the
time Apple launched its Macintosh computer with the Ridley Scott–
directed 1984 spot during the 1984 game, commercials were vying with
the pregame and halftime entertainment as can-you-top-this spectacles.
Pro football was still king, but its imperial sense of serenity came
crashing down in 1982, foreshadowing a decade of discontent most
notable for a seemingly unending run of litigation from within and
without, a potentially lethal challenge from yet another rival football
league, widespread owner infighting, player discord that would lead to

two strikes and numerous drug scandals, and myriad charges—in the
midst of all the negative publicity—that the game itself had grown too
corporate, too violent, too boring, or otherwise deficient in some crucial
way. The turmoil would resonate into the next decade, rent the loyal fan
bases in Oakland, Baltimore, and St. Louis, shake the NFL to its
foundations, and eventually put a moody cap on Pete Rozelle's
remarkable tenure.
One of the central illusions of sport is that a group of athletes wearing a
certain uniform can represent an entire city. And one of the wonders of
sport is that the repeated exercise of that illusion, through many years
and many athletes, can serve to make it a reality. The Oakland Raiders
were a privately held business, but like virtually all professional sports
franchises that had remained solvent long enough to become successful,
they occupied a unique position in their community. The Raiders had
become part of the city's identity, and succeeded in part because of that
connection. The people of Oakland and other East Bay communities—
who had supported the franchise, financed a new stadium in the ’60s,
and through more than a decade of sellouts helped make the Silver-andBlack one of the most recognizable franchises in the sport—could
plausibly be said to possess a stake in the team that went beyond a
narrow consideration of legal ownership. Too often these feelings of
loyalty are dismissed, but they were at the very heart of the appeal of
spectator sports in the late twentieth century.
While this would be true about any city that supported a franchise for
more than two decades, it was particularly true of long-mocked cities like
Baltimore, Cleveland, and Oakland. At some level, the football team
became identified with and evoked a truth about the larger city. “You'd
go anywhere in the world and you say, ‘I'm from Oakland,’ ” recalled the
actor Tom Hanks. “And people would say, ‘Is that where the Oakland
Raiders play?’ And it'd be ‘Yes, that's right, where the Oakland Raiders
play.’ ”
By the time the Raiders won their first Super Bowl after the 1976 season,
Al Davis had reached the pinnacle of pro football. Yet even as he found
the ultimate success in the game, Davis's relationship with Pete Rozelle
would thaw but never approach warmth. For this reason, the ensuing
legal battle between the Raiders and the NFL was often oversimplified as
the result of a personal animosity between Davis and Rozelle.

It was true that the two men were temperamentally ill-matched. Rozelle
exuded the middle-class politesse of the self-effacing businessman,
always deflecting credit, always flattering his opponents. He was no less
willful than his foes, but almost always smoother, calmer, more assured.
Al Davis had been fighting people like that his whole life.
But many would interpret Davis's battle with Rozelle as being motivated
solely by revenge, that Davis still held a grudge over Rozelle being
named commissioner of the merged NFL in 1966. This was a facile
reading that did neither Davis nor Rozelle justice. By the summer of
1966, Rozelle was the best-known and most powerful executive in
sports; Davis, by contrast, had held the job of AFL commissioner for only
two months when the merger was agreed upon. Under the
circumstances, it would have been unthinkable for anyone but Rozelle to
be named the commissioner of a larger, unified league.
Also, it's not at all clear that Davis truly desired the commissioner's job.
Once the leagues unified, much of the glamour and intrigue of the job
disappeared for Davis. He would have been disenchanted with the daily
challenges of the job—of consensus building and evenhanded officiating
of disputes, of calmly handling crises and serving as the game's master of
ceremonies. “That is not my modus operandi,” said Davis later,“and I am
not a commissioner. I'd rather be with a team, building a team.”
What is understandable is that Davis was infuriated by the perception,
after the merger, that Rozelle had been the mastermind to broker the
ultimate deal. His own resentment of the NFL, and his increasing sense
of paranoia over the league being “out to get” the Raiders, dated at least
as far back as 1970, when he objected to the schedule the club was
given. Rozelle, in turn, resented Davis's sponsorship of Raider defensive
back George Atkinson's libel suit against Chuck Noll (who'd called
Atkinson part of the league's “criminal element”). Many in the league,
Tex Schramm included, viewed Rozelle's decision to remove Davis from
the Competition Committee as an act of retaliation. Rozelle and Davis
would never be friends. Still, it was not apparent in the late ’70s that
they were on a collision course that would threaten to tear the league
apart. That would come later.
For much of the decade, the renegade owner who gave Rozelle the most

trouble was not Davis but his close friend, Rams owner Carroll
Rosenbloom.
It was Rosenbloom who pushed over the first domino in the chain of
events that led to the litigious ’80s, by announcing his intentions to
move the Rams out of the Los Angeles Coliseum into Anaheim Stadium.
But even before then, Rosenbloom had been at odds with Rozelle. When
the Rams signed the Lions’ wide receiver Ron Jessie, who'd just played
out his option, to a contract after the 1974 season, Rozelle ruled that it
should cost the Rams a number one draft pick and promising running
back Cullen Bryant, Rosenbloom was enraged. Not only did he allegedly
sponsor Bryant's lawsuit against the league (which ultimately resulted in
Rozelle changing the compensation to an extra draft choice rather than
Bryant) but he spent much of the next year rallying support for Rozelle's
ouster. The centerpiece of this insurgency was a November 1975 league
meeting in which Rosenbloom spent an hour in executive session ranting
about Rozelle's supposed shortcomings, vowed he'd never again attend a
league meeting in which Rozelle presided, and, on his way out the door,
said, “I'll get even with you, either in here or out there.” After
Rosenbloom stormed out, all eyes in the silent room turned to Rozelle,
who, sitting calmly at the end of the table, said, “Why don't we take a
short recess.”
But the big problem for Rosenbloom, and soon enough the league as a
whole, was the Los Angeles Coliseum. Despite the Rams’ run of seven
consecutive division titles starting in 1973, the notoriously fickle fan
base in Los Angeles quickly grew impatient with the team's inability to
reach the Super Bowl. Attendance at the aging Coliseum had fallen from
76,000 in 1974 to 53,000 by 1977. Frustrated with the city's reluctance
to refurbish the crumbling Coliseum in an increasingly dangerous part of
downtown Los Angeles, Rosen-bloom agitated for improvements,
threatening to move the team to Anaheim if he didn't get them. This
seemed unlikely especially to the entrenched and highly political
Coliseum Commission. During a private meeting, one commissioner
summed up his attitude by telling Rosenbloom, “Rosie, I think you're
bluffing, man.”
He wasn't, and even if he had been, such a bold challenge could only
have pushed him to act. On July 28, 1978, four days after signing a
letter of intent with the city of Anaheim, Rosenbloom announced that

the Los Angeles Rams were moving to Anaheim. On its face, this move
was no different than other moves from the heart of a city to a more
accommodating suburb: Buffalo had moved its stadium to nearby
Orchard Park, and the Cowboys played in suburban Irving. But the
stadium in Anaheim, located just across the street from the entrance to
Disneyland, was thirty-five miles south of the Coliseum, and anyone
from Los Angeles—Rozelle certainly included—knew that Anaheim was
in a completely different world from L.A., both culturally and
geographically. For the majority of the team's longtime fan base that
lived in and around the Los Angeles area, the prospect of an additional
two hours or more of round-trip drive time on the glutted 405 freeway
to and from the stadium was no small matter. To that end, Rozelle
pleaded with Rosenbloom in a personal let-ter,“strongly recommending”
that he not make the move to Anaheim. Rosen-bloom ignored that, but
did submit the move to a vote of owners, where it was approved.
In response to the Rams’ move, the Los Angeles Coliseum Commission
immediately appealed for the league to bring another NFL team to Los
Angeles. There was little chance of this happening, though. League
bylaws dictated that any move by an existing franchise into another
team's territory required unanimous approval, and the Rams would be
sure to oppose any move by another club into the Los Angeles area. With
little hope for expansion in the near future (the league having just added
Seattle and Tampa Bay in 1976), the LACC filed suit against the NFL on
September 13, 1978, charging that the league's rules on franchise
movements, Article IV, Section 4.3—which required unanimous
agreement by club owners for the transfer of any franchise into the home
territory of anothe franchise—was an unfair restraint of trade, in
violation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.
When the owners met in special session on October 4–5 to discuss the
Rams’ move, Rozelle also tried, at the behest of the league's lawyers, to
shore up the NFL's legal standing. Rozelle tried to push for an
amendment that would change the unanimous provision to one requiring
a three-fourths majority, figuring that such a rule would more likely be
seen as a reasonable condition by the courts. When Rozelle put the
amendment to a vote, twenty-seven teams voted in favor, but the

Raiders’ Davis passed, without stating a reason. Rozelle then announced
that he was ruling the 27–0–1 vote unanimous, prompting Davis to bark,
“If you are going to consider that unanimous, and it isn't, then I reserve
the right to move the Oakland Raiders as I see fit.” Davis wouldn't
elaborate, but the meeting ended with a curious mixture of uncertainty
and gloom.
Then, on April 2, 1979, Rosenbloom drowned off the coast of his Golden
Beach, Florida, home. Just two days after Rosenbloom's death, Al Davis
was quoted in the St. Paul Pioneer Press that “pay-TV is where it's going
to be all at. It won't matter the size of the stadiums. But can you imagine
two million viewers paying 10 bucks a head? That means the smart pro
clubs have to be in the big TV markets. That's why we're thinking about
a move to Los Angeles.”
A longtime NFL owner would remark years later that “if Carroll Rosenbloom were alive, Al never would have done what he did.”That may
have been true, although the Raiders—whose 53,000 capacity was the
second-smallest in the league—had a lease that expired after the 1979
season, and felt as though the city of Oakland was not suitably generous
in its offer. (This impression was exacerbated in January, when the
Oakland Coliseum Commission withdrew an offer that was on the table
and substituted a less favorable one.)
On March 1, 1980, Davis signed a memorandum of agreement with the
Los Angeles Coliseum Commission, which also brought the Raiders in as
co-plaintiffs in the suit against the NFL. Rather than formally requesting
a move, as the Rams had, the Raiders simply announced the intention of
moving to Los Angeles.
On March 9, the owners voted against allowing the move to Los Angeles,
22–0–5, at a meeting that Davis didn't attend. What was startling
afterward was hearing how many owners viewed Davis's greatest sin not
as leaving Oakland but as ignoring the rules of the league. “I didn't like
it,” said Davis's old Competition Committee mate Tex Schramm, “but I'd
have voted with Al if he just would have followed the rules. But then he
just up and moved, and that was something I couldn't abide by. You had
to respect the league.”
Rozelle understood what some of the owners clearly didn't: the issue was
far more than a point of order. Beyond any of the ramifications in L.A.,
the Raiders’ move was more fundamentally a betrayal of the Oakland

Raiders fans who'd supported their team for two decades, including
twelve years of consecutive sellouts. “He felt very strongly that this had
the potential to break faith with the fans in Oakland,” said Paul
Tagliabue, the Covington & Burling lawyer who would play a key role in
dozens of the antitrust suits the league defended in the ’70s and ’80s,
and who would become one of Rozelle's most trusted advisers in the
process. “From that standpoint it was a critically important case … the
fans being negatively affected by this kind of a team move added a sense
of urgency from his point of view.”
As fans, the Raiders’ rooters could hardly be faulted. But Oakland's ticket
base remained strong, through 1980 and 1981, when only a restraining
order pending the outcome of the trial kept the Raiders from moving to
L.A.
Howard Cosell had eviscerated Wellington Mara for moving the New
York Giants across the New Jersey state line to the Meadowlands in
1976, and had been pointedly critical of Rosenbloom's move to
Anaheim, but he was almost sanguine about his friend Davis's attempted
move. On December 1, 1980, with the Raiders at home for a Monday
night game against Denver, the fans of Oakland boycotted the game's
first five minutes, holding a rally outside the stadium to protest the
proposed move. Quite at odds with Cosell's reputation for candor and
intellectual honesty was his comment that the crowd was arriving late
due to “a traffic jam.”
There was a wistful nature, then, to the city's celebration in January
1981, when the Raiders rode a wild card berth to a win in Super Bowl
XV, pasting the Philadelphia Eagles, 27–10. It was difficult to embrace
an owner and a team that were trying to leave.
The trial itself was a draining three-act play. The first trial ended in a
hung jury; in the second trial, Raiders attorney Joseph Alioto hammered
the league for its arbitrary policies on franchise moves and, in the words
of former league publicist Harold Rosenthal, “had Rozelle up on the
stand saying ‘I don't remember,’ like some Chicago alderman.” On
Friday, May 7, 1982—nearly four years after the Los Angeles Coliseum
Commission filed suit and almost two years after the Raiders announced
the intention to move—the jury in Los Angeles returned a verdict in

favor of the LACC and the Raiders. In the aftermath the NFL directly
filed an appeal and both parties prepared for a third trial, this to decide
damages.
Even as the NFL went through the appeals process, the Raiders were
playing their games in L.A. It was a curious honeymoon. The team still
practiced in Oakland, and most of the players and staff retained their
Bay Area residences. Meanwhile, in Los Angeles, the vision of the
Raiders at the Coliseum was jarring for fans and writers alike. And the
team that seemed so well suited for the East Bay in Oakland seemed
utterly out of place in Southern California.
As it turned out, Davis would ultimately be victimized by his own
instincts, which had blinded him to the possibilities that the league
really was a joint partnership, devoted to the principles of revenue
sharing. His interpretation that he had to move to L.A., because the
power in the future would rest with the big markets and pay TV, would
have been well founded in any other sport (in baseball, where the cable
revenues of teams like the Yankees and Dodgers would dwarf those of
teams in smaller markets, he would have been a visionary). But in pro
football, adherence to the egalitarian precepts of revenue sharing, the
draft, the stacked schedule, the 60–40 ticket revenue split (and,
eventually, the salary cap), all served a principle of fair play, and meant
that teams from small markets like Oakland and Pittsburgh could not
only remain competitive but prosper.
These other truths would emerge over time. But on May 7, 1982, all that
Pete Rozelle or the National Football League knew was that many of the
assumptions they'd made over the nature of sports leagues and the
equilibrium of their own league were, for the time being and in the
absence of a successful appeal or congressional ruling, legally wrong.
It would be a long summer. Discussions of the implications of the
Raiders’ victory were still in the news four days later, on May 11, 1982,
when the United States Football League announced its formation in a
festive press conference at “21” in New York City. The USFL was the
brainchild of New Orleans antiques dealer David Dixon, the longtime
sports patron who worked for years to bring an NFL team to New
Orleans, and who had helped Rozelle lobby for an antitrust exemption to
allow the NFL-AFL merger in the fall of 1966.
Dixon had been arguing for the merits of a spring football league. He'd

even made a presentation to NFL owners at an annual meeting in 1973,
to use a spring league as a developmental league. From that germ of an
idea, and a survey of attitudes about sports that indicated a strong
interest in football even during the spring, the USFL got off the ground.
Chet Simmons, one of Roone Arledge's protégés at ABC, was named the
commissioner; Peter Had-hazy, who'd spent his entire adult life working
at the NFL, was hired as director of football operations. The USFL, slated
to start in March 1983, quickly earned a pair of national TV contracts,
from ABC and ESPN, and spoke of strict payroll caps and financial
sanity.
No sooner had the wave of USFL stories died down than Sports Illustrated
featured the pro game in a rare off-season cover story. The magazine's
June 14, 1982, issue featured the first all-text cover in its twenty-eightyear history, including a banner in the upper-right-hand corner reading
“SPECIAL REPORT,” and then set the lead paragraph of its story in bold
black type against a stark white background. It read:
Cocaine arrived in my life with my first-round draft into the National Football

League in 1974. It has dominated my life, one way or another, almost every minute

since. Eventually, it took control and almost killed me. It may yet. Cocaine can be

found in quantity throughout the NFL. It's pushed on players, often from the edge

of the practice field. Sometimes it's pushed by players. Prominent players. Just as it
controlled me, it now controls and corrupts the game, because so many players are
on it. To ignore this fact is to be shortsighted and stupid. To turn away from it the

way the NFL does—the way the NFL turned its back on me when I cried for help
two years ago—is a crime.

The first-person account of cocaine addiction came from Don Reese,
who'd played in Miami and New Orleans before being waived out of the
league in 1978, and included allegations that other star players,
including New Orleans running back Chuck Muncie, had been users.
Though the approach was sensational, the SI story spoke a painful
truth. Drug abuse had become a growing problem in the league, had
been one at least as far back as the mid-’60s. The league, so eager to put
the best face on the sport, seemed either unable or unwilling to confront
the problem, but drugs had long ago started to affect the game on the
field. After the strike-shortened 1982 season, in which he'd watched his

defending Super Bowl champions crumble to a 3-6 record, Bill Walsh
seriously considered quitting as head coach and attacking the problem as
a general manager. By the fall of 1982, the problem was out in the open,
fair game for comedians and no longer whispered about off the record.
In the words of the respected football writer Paul “Dr. Z” Zimmerman,
“The offense of the ’80s is now cocaine possession.”
What the league needed most after the discontented summer of 1982
was a scintillating regular season that would return the focus on football.
What it got instead was a fifty-seven-day strike, the longest in the history
of professional sports at that time, that struck at the heart of the season,
and left NFL fans angry, betrayed, and empty.
In the previous round of negotiations, Rozelle had sagely gotten an
agreement with the players association before signing the new television
deal. But in 1982, the new TV deal was signed before negotiations
started, and the record-breaking deal only emboldened the NFLPA. In
March 1982, they put forth a proposal calling for a pool of money for
player salaries, consisting of 55 percent of the gross of league revenues.
This was rejected out of hand, and was easier to do so because of the
complex system that called for much of the salary to be based on
seniority rather than the traditional individual contract bargaining
handled by individual players. The strike was called after the PackersGiants game on Monday, September 20, the season's second week. By
mid-November, when a compromise was finally reached, the owners
gave the players a sizable settlement package— worth $1.28 billion over
the coming five seasons, with improved benefits, severance pay, and $60
million in “money now” payments, to offset much of the players’ lost
wages during the strike—but little real gains in terms of power.
The truncated regular season (of just nine games) and expanded
playoffs (with sixteen teams) that followed made for an unsatisfying
season, exacerbated by the knowledge that the strike and settlement did
nothing to address the rancorous mistrust between the players and
owners.
Fans were angered, but they remained fans. Ratings for the 1983
Super Bowl, in which the Redskins defeated Miami, were high. The rules
changes that stimulated the offense had started to take effect.

Attendance had grown to 13 million by 1983, the first post-strike season.
But there was a growing sense, among those in and closest to the
game, that the league had lost its way. Rozelle didn't seem to have the
confidence of his owners as much as he once did, and the owners
themselves bickered more publicly than ever before. Rozelle, meanwhile,
was also trying to tend to the erratic behavior of Carroll Rosenbloom's
widow, Georgia, who since inheriting the team from her late husband
had fired his son, Steve, tangled with GM Don Klosterman, quickly
remarried, and hired the public relations firm of Rogers & Cowan to
burnish her image.
And, always, there was Al Davis. After the strike-shortened 1982
season, 1983 was the Raiders’ first full season in Los Angeles. With
second-year running back Marcus Allen, drafted out of Southern Cal,
leading the way on offense, the bruising Raiders marched to another
Super Bowl title, manhandling the Washington Redskins, 38–9. By the
time of the Super Bowl, January of 1984, the bad blood between Rozelle
and Davis had escalated, and had spilled over to the team. On the field
there was a painted football with Rozelle's signature on it, and in
pregame warm-ups, the Raiders players used their cleats to scrape the
name away. After the game, there was even talk that the Raiders players
would boo Rozelle when he presented the trophy. But in the moments
before the media came into the locker room, Davis told the club, “I don't
want you booing anyone. I don't want you doing anything that would be
disrespectful to the team and to the commissioner. This is not your fight.
We will conduct ourselves as gentlemen.”
Both Rozelle and Davis were gracious, as the Raiders celebrated their
third world title in eight seasons. But very soon, it became clear that the
biggest problem now was not that the Raiders were in Los Angeles. It
was the repercussions of that move for other restless owners around the
league.
One of 1982’s most compelling films was Barry Levinson's Diner, a finely
rendered period piece set among a group of young men living in
late-’50s Baltimore. The film's most celebrated scene showed the
obsessive Eddie grilling his fiancée with a quiz of Baltimore Colts trivia,

which she must pass to prove her worthiness as a mate. More than the
particular obsession of one fan, the film evoked the central role that the
Colts played in the psyche of the city of Baltimore. Native Baltimorean
Frank Deford noted that the Colts “were like a high school team for a
city of a million people.” By the time Diner was released, Baltimore's
special connection with the Colts was still formidable, but the
relationship had been frayed by the increasingly erratic behavior of
owner Robert Irsay and the team's slumping fortunes.
Sundays at 2:00—the odd kickoff time for Baltimore Colts home
games, due to a Maryland state law—were still a special occasion at
Memorial Stadium, the gathering place at 33rd Street that served as a
home for an ecumenical collection of fans that became known as the
World's Largest Outdoor Insane Asylum. The games played here bore a
distinctive look; Memorial Stadium was susceptible to a dense fog that
regularly rolled in from the Chesapeake Bay, and its playing surface
seemed to have more dirt than any other field in the league.
The promise of the Colts’ resurgence—they won the AFC East in 1975,
1976, and 1977—was blunted by their playoff exits, the last one, in
1977, an agonizing 37–31 double-overtime loss to the Raiders. Like the
Chiefs after their double-overtime home playoff loss in 1971, the Colts
went into a competitive tailspin that wouldn't abate for years. In the
final preseason game of 1978, Bert Jones injured his shoulder and
missed almost all of the 1978 and 1979 seasons. The team collapsed
along with him, and coach Ted Marchibroda was fired following the
1979 season, to be replaced by Mike McCormack, whose two-year reign
in Baltimore was even less successful than his time in Philadelphia.
On November 15, 1981, during a 38–13 loss to the Eagles, Irsay
marched to the coaches’ booth above the field and began radioing plays
down to McCor-mack. At the end of the season, McCormack (who would
describe his coaching tenure in Baltimore as “the two most unpleasant
years of my life”) was fired, along with Thomas's replacement, GM Dick
Szymanski.
From the rubble of that 2-14 record, Irsay brought in the taskmaster
Arizona State coach Frank Kush to add discipline on the field, and
installed Ernie Accorsi as GM. Accorsi had grown up a Colts fan in
Hershey, Pennsylvania (and was even a consultant for the Diner Colts

quiz). With the erratic absentee owner Irsay alienated from the
community, Accorsi played a crucial role in securing the old bond
between city and team. It was Accorsi who arranged a fitting farewell to
Unitas in 1978, bringing him back to retire his jersey. Possessed of a
sincere, weathered voice, and an Italian's resolute countenance, he often
looked like a vaguely handsome man who'd just survived a sleepdeprivation experiment. And, fittingly, his years as Baltimore's GM
provided their share of sleepless nights.
As the Colts slid to an 0-8-1 record in the strike-shortened 1982
season, Accorsi saw a glimpse of future promise. From the deepest
wellspring of quarterback talent in more than a decade—since Jim
Plunkett, Archie Manning, and Dan Pastorini went 1-2-3 in the 1971
draft—the Colts would have their choice of potential future leaders.
From Miami, there was the rangy Jim Kelly, well versed in the pro-style
offense of Howard Schnellenberger. From Pitt, there was Dan Marino,
the top-rated quarterback heading into the 1982 season, whose stock
dropped as his interception rate increased, and whose reputation was
further sullied by rumors of drug usage on the postseason all-star game
circuit. As Marino's profile dipped, the profile of Penn State quarterback
Todd Blackledge, a less physically gifted quarterback but one seen as
being more mature and more composed, rose. And Penn State's rise to a
national championship in 1982 further aided his rising reputation.
Then, in Palo Alto, California, there was The Natural. John Elway, a
two-sport star at Stanford, was the purest physical specimen Accorsi had
ever seen. In the graduated scale that many teams used, players could be
rated anywhere from 1.0 to 9.0, but for all intents and purposes, the
ratings congregated between the low 4s (borderline NFL ability) to the
high 7s (a potential Pro Bowl–caliber player). Elway had earned a rating
as high as 8.9 from some scouts, and the Colts were sure they wanted
him. Elway was less certain about the Colts. Not since 1969, when
Southern Cal's O. J. Simpson faced the prospect of going to Buffalo as
the top pick had a number one choice been so ambivalent. Elway
requested that the Colts trade him to a West Coast team or a few other
prime clubs, even threatening to pursue a baseball career instead. But
Accorsi was sure that the baseball threat was a ploy, and that if the Colts
could sign him, they might be able to turn around the team's fortunes.

He never got the chance. Six days after the draft, Irsay—on his own—
dealt Elway to Denver for Chris Hinton, the Northwestern guard who'd
been the number four overall selection, part-time quarterback Mark
Hermann, and two draft choices. Accorsi knew his days were numbered,
and resigned after the 7-9 1983 season—then immediately went to New
York to talk to his old boss Rozelle, in whom he confided that Irsay's
behavior was increasingly irrational. “You need to keep an eye on him,”
said Accorsi.
By that time, Irsay had been using the jarring Raiders verdict to cast
about for a better stadium deal, traveling to Phoenix, Indianapolis, and
Jacksonville (where he was overheard telling city officials “it's not if I
move but when”). On January 20, returning from a trip to Phoenix, Irsay
was greeted by Maryland governor William Donald Schaefer and a horde
of media, prompting an apparently drunken rant in which he stated he
had “no intention of moving the goddamn team.”
At the league office, there was persistent concern about what the
unpredictable Irsay would do. Rozelle, always one to put the best face on
owner behavior, wrote Irsay that his airport press conference “should
help in minimizing unwarranted speculation.” But on February 7, Irsay
visited the commissioner's office and complained that the negative press
coverage had left him concerned about his physical safety. Rozelle's
memorandum for the record of the meeting noted that Irsay “said he
would like to move the Colts to Phoenix … he would prefer to have a
league vote approving the move, or at least to move with the league's
blessing, although he contended neither would necessarily be required
under current circumstances in the legal situation.” At a special
privileged executive session on March 2, the league's owners met to
determine their strategy. Paul Tagliabue discussed the implications of
fighting another move with both the appeal of the Raiders verdict and
the size of the damages hanging in the balance. In the end, the league's
hands were tied. The minutes of the confidential meeting concluded that
“in view of the extraordinarily large trial court damage award in the Los
Angeles Coliseum/Raiders’ case and the current risks and confusion
created by the antitrust court rulings in California, it would be
impossible to treat the Colts’ possible transfer as a League matter…. On
that basis, the Colts’ location was concluded to be a matter for the Colts,

and not the League, to decide.” With the fate of the Colts left to Robert
Irsay—and with the city and state authorities left in the dark about both
his plans and his options—it was only a matter of time before Baltimore
would lose its football team.

On March 28, the day after the Maryland state legislature passed a
provision on eminent domain designed to legally bind the Colts to the
city, Irsay decided he had to act. Having secured a discreet deal with the
city of Indianapolis, he now summoned a fleet of Mayflower moving
vans to the Colts’ complex in Owings Mills, Maryland. That afternoon, he
ordered some of his assistant coaches—in the midst of pre-draft
preparation—to move their own desks and file cabinets into the vans. As
a snow started to fall in the growing twilight, Irsay grew more impatient.
There was no packing, only moving. The van with the team's records,
files, trophies, and scouting information was placed in the front. Later
that night, limned in radiation lights, the convoy of eleven trucks moved
out of the complex through the wet, driving snow, past a small,
crestfallen cadre of longtime Colts fans. There was nothing they could do
by then but stand by and watch in helpless disbelief as the raw materials
of Baltimore's fabled football franchise were transported away.
There was precious little, in the wake of the Raiders ruling, that the
NFL could do, save point to the absurdity of the league's double-bound
position: “We were sued in Los Angeles for opposing the Raiders’ move,”
noted Rozelle. “We would have been sued in Oakland if we had
approved that move. We are now being sued in Baltimore for not
preventing the Colts’ relocation; no doubt we would have been sued in
Indianapolis if we had done so. Under current antitrust interpretations,
we are literally damned if we do and damned if we don't.”
Behind the scenes, the league continued to work for legislation that
would overturn the moves, but this was a case of belated overstretch.
Schramm and others felt the league would have been better off
supporting a bill introduced by Pennsylvania senator Arlen Specter that
would have set specific criteria that franchises must meet before moving,
but instead the league pushed for support of a bill by Arizona senator
Dennis DeConcini that would have retroactively forced teams back to
their towns. It wasn't going to happen while the Raiders litigation was
ongoing, and it certainly wasn't going to happen while the players were

out on strike in the fall of 1982.
Irsay's greeting in Indianapolis was rapturous, but his honeymoon was
relatively short-lived. In front of a crowd estimated at 20,000 that
greeted the Colts at the still unfinished Hoosier Dome, Irsay's remarks
were mainly for the benefit of the working press. “You people of the
press have hounded my family for the last two years,” said Irsay, “and
my family is not about to take any more of your hounding.”
Then it was left to the charms of Frank Kush, who greeted the footballstarved Indianapolis fans who'd given him a standing ovation by noting,
“I bet this is the last time you stand up for me, except when you want to
run me out of town.” As the crowd murmured, Kush added thoughtfully,
“You know, it's really a pleasure to be here because we had no other
place to go.”
Baltimore's attempt to seize the team by eminent domain became
hopeless when the team was out of the state, and suddenly, some of the
league's most loyal fans were reminded how quickly things could
change. The NFL's efforts to get the original Raiders verdict overturned
ended on November 5, 1984, when the Supreme Court declined without
comment to review the Los Angeles Coliseum Commission vs. NFL case.
There was now the new landscape: the Rams were in Anaheim, the
Raiders in L.A., the Colts in Indianapolis. After 1987, the St. Louis
Cardinals moved to Phoenix (where owner Bill Bidwill chose to keep the
team's phone number unlisted in their new city). Only a last-gasp effort
from Rozelle had managed to convince the Philadelphia Eagles’
eccentric, overleveraged owner Leonard Tose to keep the club there
following the 1985 season.
“I can say this because I'm not Catholic,” wrote the football
commentator Beano Cook to Rozelle around this time. “At one time, a
handshake was all that was needed in the NFL. Credit the nuns. Most of
the owners were Catholic. They fought like hell with each other but
when a deal was made, that was it. A handshake. No lawyers. You know
that when Art Rooney gave his word, that was it. Same with the Mara
brothers. Now nobody cares except for a few owners. In many ways, the
NFL reminds me of the Roman Empire.”

20

The Last Stand

F

ielding questions from the media in the summer of 1982, Pete
Rozelle was asked about the United States Football League, which
had just announced its formation but had yet to sign a single player.
“What will happen,” said Rozelle, “is that they will play. They will start
to lose money. Then they will spend too much money on players and get
deeper in the hole. And just about the time they are ready to go out of
business, they will take a lawsuit against us. This is how it has been
historically. It will happen again with this league.”
By the time the USFL kicked off its first game, in March of 1983, the
spring football league seemed well on the way to fulfilling Rozelle's
prophecy. Despite league-wide vows of fiscal sanity in the fall, the
USFL's New Jersey Generals had signed Herschel Walker, the Heisman
Trophy–winning junior running back from Georgia, to the richest
contract in football history. In so doing, the USFL not only threw down a
gauntlet in its battle with the NFL, but also vio-lated—by signing a
player with a year of college eligibility remaining—a hallowed pact
between pro and college football that had been in place since shortly
after Red Grange's controversial signing with the Bears in 1925.
With the hard-won experience of the lawsuits that followed the
formation of the AFL and WFL, and with the additional prospect of a
sizable damage award to the Raiders and the Los Angeles Coliseum
Commission in the offing, the NFL owners were in little mood for a
player war. But by signing such stars as Walker, North Carolina's Kelvin
Bryant, and Michigan's Anthony Carter, the USFL forced the war upon

them. In 1984, the USFL lured another Heisman winner, Nebraska's Mike
Rozier, as well as blue-chip quarterback Steve Young, signed to an
astounding $40 million deal. Rookie contracts in the NFL had more than
doubled in the space of two years, and the USFL—drafting in early
January, three months before the NFL—wasn't just skimming off a few
names, but were signing players in volume. In the 1984 draft alone, the
Los Angeles Express signed fourteen players who had been expected to
go in the first four rounds of the NFL draft.
The USFL's quality of play was instantly higher than the fly-by-night
World Football League of the ’70s had ever been. Most of the USFL clubs
were solid (teams in Denver and Tampa Bay enjoyed attendance that
approached their NFL counterparts) and many of its football coaches and
administrators were well respected. The USFL had hired coaches like
George Allen, Steve Spurrier, and Marv Levy. The director of football
operations was Peter Had-hazy, a twenty-year veteran of the NFL office.
Its administrators included such future NFL successes as Bill Polian, Carl
Peterson, and Bruce Allen.
But the USFL was largely defined—some would say hijacked—by the
desires and delusions of real estate tycoon Donald Trump, who
purchased the New Jersey Generals in 1984, at a time when the league
rashly expanded from twelve to eighteen teams, and immediately pushed
for a move from the spring to the fall, where the USFL would be
competing directly with the NFL. That this move was completely
antithetical to Dixon's long-stated USFL charter— to play football in the
spring, when there was precious little heavyweight competition for
television viewers—was irrelevant to Trump's ambition.
On September 13, 1984, the USFL announced that after playing its
1985 season in the spring, it would move to a fall schedule in 1986, to
confront the NFL directly. Rozelle responded in a letter to USFL
commissioner Chet Sim-mons,“It is also becoming clearer and clearer
that a treble-damage lawsuit features at least as strongly in the USFL
plans as does making your league a business and entertainment success.”
Two weeks after Rozelle's letter, on October 18, the USFL filed a $1.69
billion antitrust suit against the NFL.
The move had come against the wishes of a valiant minority of owners
who were making their way in the spring. Carl Peterson, Dick Vermeil's

personnel director with the Eagles, had built the Philadelphia Stars into
a league power that drew an average of 18,000 while going to the
championship game in the first season and 29,000 while winning it the
second. The team was planning a ticket push to the 35,000 mark, which
would have put the club into the black. Instead, the USFL chose a makeor-break battle with the NFL in the fall, thereby neutralizing much of its
own hard-fought gains.
“Of course that was spirited by Donald Trump and [Chicago Blitz coowner] Eddie Einhorn, and they got a majority to vote yes on it,” said
Peterson. “But they also absolutely were convinced that this move would
either precipitate an acquisition of some USFL teams into the NFL or we
would have an antitrust case out against the NFL, because they
controlled basically all the networks at that time, and that we would win
hands down. And that's what these guys convinced us. Eddie Einhorn
was on the baseball broadcast committee, he owned part of the White
Sox with Jerry Reinsdorf, and he absolutely assured us, he said, ‘It'll be
done in thirty days; at the max, sixty days.’ And of course Donald
believed that. Anyway, the proof was, it took a little bit longer than
that.”
It would take nearly two years for the antitrust case to work itself
through the courts and, in the meantime, the 1985 season found the
USFL in a desperate holding pattern, trying to hang together long
enough to benefit from a possible judgment. There were fewer bigmoney signings prior to the 1985 season, there being less big money left.
Heisman winner Doug Flutie, whose NFL prospects were uncertain,
became the third straight Heisman winner to join the USFL, signed by
Trump's New Jersey Generals. The season was a hodgepodge of
reorganization: franchises merged in Michigan and Oakland, as well as
Oklahoma and Arizona. The Los Angeles Express, one of the league's
flagship franchises, spent the season in shambles, and wound up moving
its games from the Los Angeles Coliseum to tiny Pierce College in
Woodland Hills. Teams in Philadelphia, Washington, and New Orleans
all had to move, since their NFL counterparts held exclusive leases on
their stadiums in the fall, and since being in a different market would
increase their chances of being brought into the NFL in the event of a
merger settlement. It was a particularly painful move for the Stars, who

spent the 1985 season training in Philadelphia, where most of their
players and staff lived, and traveled to Baltimore for home games.
Amidst all the shifts, the juggled, stumbling league saw its TV ratings
drop 30 percent. By the end of that third season, the league had lost a
collective $200 million. But it still had one more chance, and that was to
win its case against the NFL.

And in this, it seemed, the USFL had more than a puncher's chance,
heightened by the thicket of contradictory antitrust rulings involving
sports leagues that had accumulated through much of the ’70s, as well as
the possibility that the NFL's contracts with all three major TV networks
would be viewed as evidence itself that the NFL was a monopoly. In the
buildup to the opening of the trial in the spring of 1986, the NFL
brought in a company called Legal Creative Services, which produced
the makings of an exceedingly realistic mock trial—judge, courtroom,
impaneled jury. The veristic conditions yielded a startling result: a
unanimous decision for the USFL.
Shortly thereafter, the NFL's lead attorney on the case, Robert Fiske,
met the owners in executive session at the 1986 annual meetings, and
gave them a gloomy progress report on the case.
“If you were the client,” asked Norman Braman of the Eagles,“what
would you do—fight this or settle it?”
“I'd settle it,” said Fiske, reluctantly.
There was a moment of painful silence, as the implications of that
sank in with the assembled owners. At that point a voice near Rozelle
spoke up.“I have a different opinion on that question,” said Paul
Tagliabue. “And I would like the chance to give you my answer.”
If anyone understood the prospects of the USFL side or what was at
stake for the NFL, it was Tagliabue. He had been steeped in the league's
antitrust philosophy—articulated by Hamilton Carothers years earlier in
a letter to Rozelle, that the league would spend “millions for defense,
and not one red cent for tribute.” In the mock trial held earlier in the
year, Tagliabue had argued the USFL's side of the case (against Fiske
making the NFL argument) and he understood better than any outsider
why the NFL had to fight it.
“I would not settle the case,” Tagliabue said. “Let's go to trial. I don't

think you've got a serious exposure here. I think the case is a sham and I
think there's a lot of evidence to show that it's a sham, and it's not a case
where you're just going to be defending. It's a case where you have an
affirmative way of characterizing what occurred that is damning in
respect to their claims.”

Tagliabue's stand would turn out to be a key turning point in
convincing the owners to fight the case in court, and would alter the
perceptions of many about the bright, formal lead counsel.
After the meeting, Tagliabue was called into a private meeting of
Rozelle's inner circle, including Tex Schramm, Dan Rooney, and
Wellington Mara. He expanded on his ideas, making the obvious but
crucial point that settling with the USFL would set a precedent that
would leave the NFL perpetually exposed to outsiders trying to sue their
way into the NFL. “One consideration was that if you buckled into these
people then you'd have start-up leagues and claims on an annual basis,”
said Tagliabue. “You couldn't encourage people to create half-assed
leagues and then walk away with a lot of money one way or the other. If
you felt you didn't do anything wrong, you should be prepared to stand
in defense.” His argument held the day, and so the NFL decided to head
back to the courts again.
Fiske remained on the case but moved into a lesser role. Two days
after the meetings, Rozelle phoned Frank Rothman, who'd been slated to
be the lead attorney on the second Raiders antitrust case, before being
offered the job as the president of MGM Studios. Two weeks earlier, the
sharp, magnanimous Roth-man had ended his five-year tenure as the
head of production at MGM, and Rozelle brought him back into the fold.
The USFL trial was a melodramatic tour de force, a draining elevenweek ordeal that featured contradictory testimony from Trump and
Rozelle, Al Davis up on the stand, testifying on behalf of the USFL, and
Howard Cosell, expansive and combative, and by then in the midst of a
long, sad decline.
The flamboyant Harvey Myerson, laying out the USFL's case,
hammered home the details of a Harvard Business School speech,
sponsored by the NFL Management Council, in which professor Michael
Porter delivered a paper titled “How to Destroy the USFL.”

Rothman had seen the way testimony about Porter's speech had
swayed the mock jury, and was determined not to let it happen in the
real trial. To do that, though, it wouldn't be sufficient to deny the
importance of it. What was crucial was to prove that the suggestions that
Porter offered—signing the top USFL stars, moving up the draft, giving
ABC an inferior schedule of Monday Night Football games as punishment
for signing with the USFL in the spring— had never been implemented
on a league-wide basis. After his legal team scoured league files from
throughout the ’80s, Rothman had the evidence he needed. As he told
the Boston Globe’s Will McDonough shortly after the trial, “We had
evidence to show now that the Porter plan was not placed in effect and
that no one used it.” Coolly assured, and scrupulously accurate,
Rothman patiently laid out the NFL's side, and spent as much time with
Trump on the stand as possible. Rothman also argued that the USFL's
move to the fall was made less for competitive benefit than to force a
settlement with the NFL.
The jury had deliberated for five days when the word came that they'd
delivered a verdict. Pete Rozelle was at a Chinese restaurant for lunch
with Val Pinchbeck, the NFL's vice president of programming, on July
29, 1986. As they were finishing, Thelma Elkjer called the restaurant, to
pass along a message that the verdict was about to be read. They paid
the check and raced out to the commissioner's car. Rozelle and
Pinchbeck were in the back of the car when the news headline came on
…
The United States Football League won its court case against the NFL.
Details to come …
As Pinchbeck sat in stunned silence, Rozelle tipped his head straight
back, visibly recoiling from the news.“I remember, I was afraid maybe
he was gonna have a heart attack,” said Pinchbeck. In the stunned
silence, Pinchbeck instructed the driver to return to the league offices:
“Back to 410 Park.”
In the moments that the car waded into midtown traffic, Rozelle
remained in his position of frozen dejection. Then the radio station
returned from its commercial break, to provide the rest of the story.
… The NFL was found guilty on just one of the nine counts. And the jury

awarded the USFL the sum of one dollar …
With that, Rozelle and Pinchbeck launched off of the back seat in an
excited celebration, slapping the seat backs and door frames with joy,
while Rozelle gave the new directive, “Let's go down to the courthouse!”
Greeting Rothman with an embrace on the courthouse steps, Rozelle
spoke of his sense of vindication. When Rozelle returned to his office, he
received a call from Tex Schramm, with the Cowboys for a London
exhibition against the Bears.
“Pete, I love you!” Schramm exclaimed. “We have survived! Can you
believe it?”
It was left to Paul Brown, among the old-guard owners, to put the
outcome in perspective. “This is the biggest threat we'd ever faced,” said
Paul Brown. “While I felt all along that we were in the right, I didn't
have that much faith in what the jury might decide.”
Weeks later, the owners held a celebration dinner at the Regency
Hotel, where both Tagliabue and Rothman were presented a crystal
sword, evoking the myth of King Arthur and the Knights of the Round
Table. Privately at one point Rozelle confided in Tagliabue,“You know,
you've made a great contribution to the league. You understand the
business, you understand the people. At some point, who knows, you
might be commissioner.”
The nuances of the Raiders case and the USFL case were lost to most
football fans, but the ultimate outcome would have a major impact on
the shape of pro football. The Raiders decision would threaten more
betrayals of the loyalty and devotion of fans that was the lifeblood of the
modern game. The USFL decision, ultimately, would end for the
foreseeable future the regular challenges by upstart leagues, and it
would allow the NFL to continue to develop its own closed system. Yet
the league's house was still not in order, and the litany of litigation
would not end for another five years.
It had long been Rozelle's theory that the way to stay on top of the
sports news was to stay out of the business and labor news. Not
surprisingly, the repeated stories of the NFL in the courts and on strike
had a withering effect. Media coverage was still widespread, but more
critical, less deferential. When Jim Brown posed in a Raiders uniform for

the cover of Sports Illustrated in 1983, as part of a far-fetched comeback
bid he was considering, to rescue his all-time rushing record from Franco
Harris, the cover blurb included the tagline that Brown was “just what
the bor-ring NFL needs.” When the New York Times’s David Harris wrote
The League, an account of the behind-the-scenes boardroom struggles, it
was subtitled, The Rise and Fall of the National Football League. The media
projected many of the league's off-the-field problems onto the field, and
prescriptives for fixing the game were a common staple of ’80s
publications, from Inside Sports to Esquire.
Despite the barbs, the truth was that the NFL made significant gains in
media coverage in the ’80s. The advent of the national daily newspaper
USA To d a y played perfectly to the serious sports fan, with more indepth statistics and longer game stories than most local papers. A
readership survey of the readers of The Sporting News, the longtime
“bible of baseball,” showed that most of its readers were bigger NFL
fans. And under managing editor Mark Mulvoy, Sports Illustrated
significantly increased its already substantial coverage of pro football.
But the biggest change occurred on cable television, with the rise of
ESPN, the all-sports cable network that began televising the NFL draft in
1982, and experienced unheard-of ratings for several hours of talking
heads discussing college prospects. By the time ESPN got a share of the
NFL regular season package in 1987 (eight late-season games, broadcast
on Sunday nights), the network was using the NFL to prove its validity.
“It was the single most important event ever,” said Steve Bornstein, at
the time the president of the network. “It totally legitimized the network
—we had arrived.” ESPN's twenty-four-hour format gave a significant
boost to NFL Films, whose weekly series This Is the NFL quickly became
one of the network's most popular blocks of nonevent programming.
Back on the field, in the midst of the aerial dazzle of the 49ers’ offense
and the big-play theatrics of Dan Marino and the Dolphins’ 1984 Super
Bowl season, the game started moving in the other direction, away from
pass-first philosophy to a more basic, fundamental approach.
“Neanderthal football,” as Giants coach Bill Parcells described it.
Strategically, the mid-’80s was an era in which the running game—as

typified by the Washington Redskins’ intimidating front-line, the Hogs,
and the bruising fullback John Riggins—would reassert itself. Though
teams like San Francisco continued to use an undersized line and win
through finesse and complexity, most teams were in the punishing mold
of the Redskins, Giants, and Bears, who would combine to win four titles
during the decade.

And this return to the eternal verities of the sport went beyond
offensive strategy. The rush to artificial surfaces had crested and, by the
mid-’80s, was beginning to roll back, with natural grass fields replacing
carpets in Miami, San Francisco, Chicago, and New England. Even in
sartorial terms, the league was moving backward. A generation after Joe
Namath's white shoes had been synonymous with NFL style, the Bears’
Jim McMahon wore black high-top cleats, prompting a no-nonsense
rollback in footwear.
Even entire teams could hark back to their earlier glory days, as the
Cleveland Browns did in the mid-’80s. Few franchises had the tradition
of the Browns and, by 1984, few owners in pro football were as
respected as Art Modell. Through the years, he was there at every
practice, never meddling, but sitting in his golf cart, avidly watching,
ever the fan. Modell's obvious commitment to the team helped deflect
criticism when the Browns struggled, which was often.
The club hadn't won a playoff game since beating Dallas in the 1969
playoffs. After the brief, mercurial rise of Sam Rutigliano's Kardiac Kids
in the late ’70s—and the debilitating playoff loss to the Raiders in 1980
—the Browns had fallen back in the early ’80s. Saving the watered-down
1982 strike season when more than half the league was allowed into the
playoffs (the Browns going with a 4-5 record), 1980 had been
Cleveland's only real playoff appearance since 1972.
After beginning the 1984 season 1-7, Modell fired Rutigliano, and
hired defensive coordinator Marty Schottenheimer, a former linebacker
for the Patriots and Bills, and a football overachiever who'd become a
highly respected defensive architect. Even at 1-7, Schottenheimer's
defense was recognized as one of the best in the league, a boisterous but
disciplined band of hard-hitters who could frustrate offenses with their
sound, spirited play.

In Schottenheimer's vigilant intensity, the modern Browns would find
a new identity. With his earnest demeanor and thick wire-rimmed
glasses, Schottenheimer looked like an eighth-grade science instructor,
an appearance all the more apt because he was a teacher in the truest
and most traditional sense of the word. Even in the second half of the
1984 season, leading the Browns to a 4-4 finish, Schottenheimer seemed
constantly aware of the ability to educate and inspire his players to
greater lengths. When a player would come to the sidelines after an
error, the coach wouldn't haughtily ignore him, nor give him a dressing
down. Instead, Schottenheimer would walk right over to the player, put
an arm on each of his shoulder pads, look him directly in the eye, and
say, “Young man …”
At the end of the 1984 season, Modell promoted Ernie Accorsi (who
had been hired as an adviser shortly after leaving the Colts) to director
of football operations, the team's de facto general manager. During that
same off-season, Accorsi engineered the drafting of Bernie Kosar, the
Miami, Florida, quarterback who'd grown up in Ohio and had a lifelong
dream to play for the team. “It's not an everyday occurrence that
somebody wants to play in Cleveland,” said Modell during the 1985
preseason. “That has lent such an aura to Bernie.” In Schottenheimer's
first full season, the youthful Browns finished 8-8, enough to win the
mediocre AFC Central. They pressed the Miami Dolphins in the playoffs,
squandering a 21–3 fourth-quarter lead in a 24–21 loss.
The team was developing an identity as a tough, opportunistic, nononsense squad that rarely beat itself. The Browns’ secondary, playing
with a proprietary fervor, had taken to calling themselves the Dawgs,
barking after sacks, interceptions, and other big plays. The chatter was
picked up during the team's training camp and, by the middle of the
1985 season, the fans in the east end zone at Cleveland Stadium had
christened the entire area as the “Dawg Pound,” barking up a storm,
dressed in dog collars, or waving large dog bones, throwing biscuits and
all other manner of paraphernalia at opposing players. The behavior of
the fans marked a new plateau in the progression of the most vociferous
football fans. In the ’70s, in places like Miami and Pittsburgh, fans
waved white handkerchiefs or golden towels en masse, to create a visual
spectacle. But the Dawg Pound was a more raucous enterprise. The

elaborate costumes seemed a calculated ploy to get time on national
television. But it also sparked the entire Cleveland Stadium, and soon the
rickety old structure in downtown Cleveland, with its fierce winds,
raucous fans, and cold weather, became one of the toughest places in the
NFL for a visiting team to play. The Browns were throwbacks,
reminiscent of the tough teams that Collier coached in the mid-’60s.
Even their uniforms harked back to the glory days of Jim Brown.
In 1986, it all came together. The precocious Kosar blossomed as a
quarterback and leader. Running back Earnest Byner was the workhorse
of a versatile backfield, and the Browns’ defense matured in the final
quarter of the season, winning four straight to secure home field
advantage throughout the playoffs. After an improbable 23–20 overtime
win over the Jets, Cleveland hosted the AFC championship game on
January 11, against the Denver Broncos.
The city reached a fever pitch the week of the game, and there was
heavy traffic outside the Broncos’ hotel on the eve of the game, horns
honking through the night. Sunday dawned bitterly cold, with a piercing
wind blowing in off Lake Erie, promising exactly the sort of contest for
which Schotten-heimer's clubs were built. After Cleveland held Denver
without a touchdown for much of the game, the Browns took a sevenpoint lead on a late drive. The ensuing kickoff, buffeted by the wind and
on the muddy field, was recovered by Denver on its own two-yard line,
with five minutes left.
Against the sound of a city howling to exorcise twenty-two years of
sporting demons, John Elway and his Denver teammates gathered at the
back of the end zone. The scene seemed so hopeless that Elway and his
teammates were actually giggling during the TV timeout. What
happened next would begin to solidify Elway's reputation for magic, as
well as Schottenheimer's for hard luck. Elway marched Denver 98 yards,
converting on three third downs, including a third-and-18, when the ball
snapped from the shotgun formation careened off the hip of Steve
Watson, who'd been in motion. Elway neatly recovered it and threw a
strike for a key first down, setting up the tying score. In overtime,
Denver got the ball and quickly moved down the field, and Rich Karlis's
kick was ruled good, though many Browns fans and players alike were
convinced it had gone wide. And suddenly another enchanted season

ended prematurely, just as it had for Rutigliano's Browns in 1980. But
Schotten-heimer's team was sounder, and would return to the title game
the following season, though with equally agonizing results.
Meanwhile, a legend had been born. Though the Broncos would lose
to the Giants, 39–20, in the Super Bowl, Elway's exploits would go down
as a benchmark in a new chapter of the mystique of the quarterback.
The change had begun in the ’70s, largely in the escapability and
leadership of Roger Staubach, whose persona exuded none of the battleof-the-wits aura of a Unitas or Na-math. Most prized was the sense of
leading a team, not with cleverness so much as with poise and will, out
of a series of crises and into the promised land. It was personified by
Staubach's scrambling, and the on-the-move im-provisational skills of
Joe Montana. And though others would lead nearly as many comebacks,
it was Elway who elevated this daredevilry to a kind of exalted art form.
It was not as though wits weren't required in the new setup. Defenses
were more complex than ever, and the chore of reading those defenses
and divining those disguises still fell on the quarterback's shoulders. But
when the actual act of calling the plays reverted to coaches and
coordinators, then the quality most prized in quarterbacks went from
craftiness (like Unitas's innate, confounding ability to call a play that
was different from what the defense thought he would call) to
composure (like Elway's joking with teammates prior to The Drive, or
Joe Montana, absurdly cool under pressure, looking at the clock with
2:00 left in Super Bowl XXIII and asking his huddled offensive
teammates, during a TV timeout, “Isn't that John Candy in the stands?”).
What Schottenheimer would see, across fields from Elway for more
than a decade, was this unteachable, unlearnable skill on Elway's part,
the ability to keep his head when all about him were losing theirs.
Teams would flush Elway from the pocket, force him toward the
sideline, converge toward him, and then, in an instant, watch him stop
running, set his right foot, plant his left, and peg an absurdly arcing long
pass across his body and across the field to a wide-open receiver
streaking open 40, 50, even 60 yards down the field on the opposite
sideline. It was more acrobatic, if perhaps less intellectual than the play
calling of Unitas and Namath, but the shot to the heart was just as lethal.
Though the league emerged intact from the USFL insurgency, the 1987

annual meetings were still conducted amid an air of gloom. For the first
time after decades of routine increases, the new national TV contract, a
$1.4 billion, three-year deal, showed a slight dip in annual per-team
revenue.

Immediately ahead was another negotiation with the NFL Players
Association, determined to bargain for free agency. Meanwhile, the NFL
Management Council, whose membership was dominated by hard-line
owners like Tex Schramm and Tampa Bay's Hugh Culverhouse, and
whose offices weren't even located at the league headquarters, geared up
for another battle of wills.
When the NFLPA walked out again, it confronted a more hardened, if
conflict-weary, group of owners. Lamar Hunt, always a pragmatist on
these matters, had suggested to his colleagues in 1982 that the league
consider hiring replacement players so that it could offer a product to
television and give the veterans who were so inclined incentive to cross
the picket lines. It was one of the few things that Schramm and Hunt
agreed on, and it informed the Management Council's hard-line stance
during the 1987 strike. “We had learned some things and were
determined not to let what happened in 1982 recur,” said Schramm. “We
learned that, as a strike progressed, more and more players began to
disagree with the wisdom of it but had no recourse or alternative
because the union's leadership was so committed. We also were aware
that it was very damaging to the league to go through such a long period
without any games. We lost the interest of the media, the fans, and
everybody else as far as pro football was concerned. There were no
games, and all you read about was the strike.”
After the Patriots-Jets Monday night game of September 21, the
Players Association called a strike. This time the league was ready. After
one weekend's games were canceled, the league scheduled games for
week four with replacement players.
These replacement players received the NFL minimum of $3,125 a
week, and in the cases of teams like the Giants, who hadn't actively
recruited prior to the season, the collection that played was a motley
assortment of out-of-shape ex-college also-rans and has-been semipro
grunts. Surveying his “team” during the first scab practice in 1987, Bill
Parcells remarked dryly, “I believe there are a few guys out there who

the Heisman voters overlooked.” The team's first game was a Monday
Night Football matchup with the 49ers, in which they were outclassed
41–21 in front of 15,471. In the closing minutes, a camera focused for
twelve seconds on defensive lineman Reggie Carr, apparently asleep on
the Giants sideline.

There were fewer veterans crossing the line than expected, but with
replacement games still drawing modest crowds and TV audiences, the
players had no leverage. They voted to return to their teams on October
15, just twenty-four days into the strike, even though no settlement was
reached. And on the same day the players returned, the NFLPA filed an
antitrust case against the NFL in Minnesota federal court, seeking to
overturn the league's free agent compensation system and give players
full free agency.
In the short term, though, the owners’ victory was complete. In Te x
Schramm's words, “There was no agreement; they just came back.” But
there was little celebrating among management, as the walkout had
further alienated owners from players and both groups from fans.
Rozelle himself thought the use of replacement players was a huge
mistake, destroying the credibility of the league with its fans and
players, as well as the networks and advertisers. For Dan Rooney, who'd
toiled as a loyal part of the league structure for years, one problem was
his close friend Rozelle's unwillingness to be involved directly. Hewing
to his role as “impartial observer,” Rozelle declined to sit in on the
negotiating sessions.
Assessing the damage to the league's reputation after the fact, many in
the NFL came to the conclusion that, whatever the tactical success
derived from using replacement players, the larger price wasn't worth it.
“If you're going to have ‘labor disruption’ every five years, well, ‘labor
disruption’ is an industry term,” said Bill Polian, Buffalo's GM at the
time.“When you translate that to the fan, that means that his favorite
player is tarnished. His team is disrupted. But what we're in business to
do is to entertain and please and involve the fans—that's what we do for
a living. So if you constantly erode that bond between the fans and the
players in the franchise, if it becomes labor problems and a disruption of
the product on the field as opposed to rooting for the Buffalo Bills or the

Oakland Raiders, or the New England Patriots, or whomever—you've
broken a connection with the fans.”
Without an agreement there wasn't even the sense of making peace
that had existed after the 1982 strike. In 1987, the players returned, but
remained equally adamant and disaffected about their treatment. And
there were more problems than a lack of a collective bargaining
agreement and meaningful free agency. The league's drug policy seemed
at once harsh and inconsistent, and when Rozelle implemented a
steroids-testing program, the Players Association vowed to fight it in
court.
There was also the inescapable issue of race. In a league in which
more than 50 percent of the players were black, the NFL had been very
slow in pushing for opportunities for minorities off the field. Outside of
Upshaw, head of the NFLPA, there hadn't been a high-ranking black in
the league structure since the death of Buddy Young.
At the club level, there was little but frustration for savvy executives
like Tank Younger in Los Angeles and San Diego, and Bobby Mitchell in
Washington. They had the experience and the know-how to be general
managers, but there wasn't an owner in the league willing to give them
the responsibility.
Those with the long view could see progress. As a player, Younger had
been the first black to make All-Pro at linebacker, and as he moved into
scouting and front office work, he'd watched other positions change.
“Back in the ’60s, a lot of the cornerbacks were black, ’cause they could
run. Then the game started changing, the offenses started changing. So
defenses went from having two black cornerbacks to now they started
having black strong safeties, because the big tight ends were coming out
then who could run—John Mackey, Ray Chester—these kind of guys. So
then offenses caught up with that, because the defenses kept a free safety
—a white kid that was supposed to be smart and all that shit, but he
couldn't run. So the offenses found a way to isolate some fucker who
could fly on him. So now, you look at the defensive back-field and 90
percent of them are all black.” By the beginning of the ’80s, the last
onfield barriers were coming down. Dwight Stephenson became the first
AllPro black center in 1983, Doug Williams became the first black
quarterback to win a Super Bowl in 1988, and Art Shell became the first

African-American head coach of the modern era, in 1989.
But for many blacks, the slow, sporadic litany of firsts was growing
tiresome. Few spoke with more authority on the topic than Jim Brown.
He, like many other players, were put off by the fuss surrounding Doug
Williams's publicized Super Bowl win.
“Sometimes, all this talk about black quarterbacks makes me feel I've
stepped into a time warp, landed in 1958,” wrote Brown in his memoir,
Out of Bounds. “It's almost the 1990s, people still discuss a few black
quarterbacks as if they represent some meaningful breakthrough for
blacks. When Doug Williams played in the Super Bowl, I kept reading
that the moment was proud and historical for blacks. Is that right? To
me, it sounded more like the white media working out its hangups. The
story of that game wasn't Doug Williams's blackness. It was that Doug's
career was nearly expired, he had the heart to keep coming back, to stay
prepared, then excelled in the most pressure-filled game of his life. That
had nothing to do with his blackness, and I don't buy its profundity for
other black people. Blacks in the 1990s don't need any more symbols.
They need equal rights. What Doug Williams did in the Super Bowl won't
do shit for a cat who can't throw a football.”
Though the change had come on the field and in the huddle, where
black quarterbacks and middle linebackers had become commonplace, a
much different story was taking place on the sidelines. In 1980, there
were only fourteen black assistants in the NFL, none at the coordinator
level. Only Bill Walsh's 49ers club seemed to actively recruit minorities,
and by 1988, Walsh had four black coaches on his staff, including two—
Dennis Green and Ray Rhodes—who would get head coaching jobs in
the ’90s.
But the big coaching news in 1989 was the Raiders’ mid-season hiring
of Art Shell, the first black head coach in the league's modern era. To the
small fraternity of black coaches throughout the league, the hiring was
the exception that proved the rule. The first NFL team to hire a black
coach would be the one team isolated from the traditional NFL mind-set.
In Pittsburgh, Tony Dungy—lanky, poised, outwardly serene—
developed a reputation as an assistant coach who was going places, a
rising star moving quickly up the ladder. He retired at twenty-five, when

he became the league's youngest assistant coach in 1981. Three years
later, he became the league's youngest coordinator, taking over the
Steelers’ defense. Inheriting a squad that was a shell of the dominating
defense that had been the cornerstone of the Steelers’ ’70s dynasty,
Dungy had mastered Chuck Noll's low-key style, and enjoyed results.
And yet he got no job offers, nor even any interviews.

It was at a league meeting, in the mid-’80s, talking with the wizened
Giants’ GM George Young, that Dungy first sensed what he was up
against.
“I want to help you,” said Young, somewhat bashfully. “I want to see
you succeed in this business, and I think you can. But you'll never
advance any farther with that beard. It's just not seen in the NFL.”
The soft-spoken Dungy told Steelers owner Dan Rooney about it.
“Well, in some organizations, that's probably true,” said Rooney. “But we
like people to be themselves. In our organization, I wouldn't worry about
it. But in some organizations that's probably true.”
The problem, of course, was not unique to sports. As blacks were
moving into more and more central roles within sports, entertainment,
and other in-dustries—as a burgeoning black middle class was in many
cases realizing the rough outlines of the American dream—there was a
different story in the hallways and offices.
The actor Laurence Fishburne would recall a dinner he attended in the
mid-’80s, in which he spoke to the multitalented entrepreneur Quincy
Jones, the producer of the Oscar-nominated The Color Purple. When
Fishburne asked Jones if he'd considered hiring a black director to
handle the film, Jones replied that he didn't know any black directors.
Fishburne later said, “I remember thinking, ‘Well you should know some
black directors. You should make it your business to know.’ But I didn't
say that.”
And so it went in pro football in the ’80s. There were some talented
black coaches working their way up the ladder—not just Dungy, but
Dennis Green in San Francisco, Shell in Oakland, Romeo Crennel in New
York—but not many GMs, presidents, and owners knew of them.
And fewer still made it their business to know.
Even in the final, and best, Super Bowl of the decade, there was an

undercurrent of discontent. In his tenth year as a head coach, Bill Walsh
piloted the 49ers to another Super Bowl against, once again, the
Cincinnati Bengals, a team coached by former Walsh assistant Sam
Wyche, who had taken some of Walsh's offensive concepts and adapted
them to an even more wide-open system, this one employing the shotgun
formation and, often, a hurry-up offense.

After a seesaw battle, the Bengals took a lead late in the fourth
quarter, before Montana directed another precision late-game rally,
nailing John Taylor in the end zone in the final minute to lift the 49ers
to their third title in eight seasons (they would win a fourth the
following year). But even that signal event was muted somewhat by the
setting, Miami's Joe Robbie Stadium, just blocks away from the
Overtown section of the city, which had suffered six days of rioting in
the weeks leading up to the game.
Through the long, miserable decade, Rozelle soldiered on, grimly
determined to work his old charm and resolve as many problems as
possible. But much of the job's joy had been drained in the ongoing
series of depositions that dominated the decade. And when Rozelle
suffered a small stroke in 1987 (unbeknownst to any but his family and
closest friends), even the commissioner's Friday press conference became
an effort, though he rose to the occasion.
Carmen Policy was working in the front office of the San Francisco
49ers, the most successful franchise of the ’80s. He saw a leader who
was consumed with the tasks at hand. “I got the impression that Pete
was like an airline pilot trying to steady the plane through a great deal
of turbulence, and couldn't deal with having the meals and cocktails
served to the passengers. And they were hungry back there!”
The league was still the number one sport, but the challenges—labor
unrest and acrimony, rumors of drug abuse, owner infighting, challenges
anew from upstart leagues—had seemed, after a while, more like
conditions than challenges. For the first time in his career, Rozelle
seemed tired, and without a clear vision of where to proceed next.
“I saw more frowns on Pete's face in the late ’80s than I'd seen in all
the years before that put together,” said Don Weiss. “There were some
things he just didn't want to hear about or be confronted with. A

mundane thing or something with the Alumni Foundation or the Hall of
Fame, unless it had a subpoena attached to it, that was intruding. And
he never was like that before then. I feel sorry for the guys who came in
late and never saw the real Rozelle.”

That fall he had trouble sleeping. By his wife, Carrie's, estimation, he
was smoking three packs of cigarettes a day, sleeping fitfully, and
dreading work. He would stay awake long enough to watch the eleven
o'clock news, drift off to a restless sleep, and then, eyes bloodshot, get up
an hour or two later and roam the house, chain-smoking and sketching
out ideas on an ever-present legal pad. Somewhere, in the quiet space of
one of those long nights, Pete Rozelle reached a conclusion that had
been years in the making: I'm not going to get everything cleared up.
Paul Tagliabue, who'd spent so much time with Rozelle during the
array of litigation in the ’80s, saw evidence of the same torment. “It was
obvious that he was not enjoying it, and it was obvious that his wife was
not enjoying his lack of enjoyment.”

21

Changing of the Guard

W

ednesday, March 22, 1989, looked like a particularly slow day at
the Marriott Desert Springs Resort in Palm Desert, California. The
third day of the NFL's annual meetings had been an uneventful one; the
Competition Committee was holding off its recommendation on
renewing instant replay, the most important votes—announcing the
league's new steroids-testing policy, and a limit on off-season roster sizes
—had already been pushed through, and the afternoon executive session
agenda included little more than a report by the Management Council.
Pete Rozelle called the roll at the afternoon session, then faced the
group of owners with whom he'd helped chart the course of pro
football's ascendancy. Hairline receding to nothingness, face paunchy
and drawn, and lacking the color of his omnipresent magnificent tan,
Rozelle looked like a president of the United States at the end of his
second term. He mentioned that twenty-nine years earlier, when he'd
been elected commissioner, Paul Brown assured him that he'd grow into
the job. “Well, Paul,” he said to Brown, “I don't know how well I did, but
you sure gave me enough time to do it.” Then Rozelle announced that
he'd decided the previous fall to announce his retirement at this meeting,
and was doing so immediately. There was a moment of profound,
stunned silence, followed by a standing ovation. On his way out the door
to the press conference in an adjacent room, he was intercepted by Al
Davis, who embraced him and wished him the best of luck. Years later,
owners and others in Rozelle's inner circle were still arguing about
whether Davis's gesture was a heartfelt act of reconciliation or merely a

pose of Machiavellian utility. Some never could decide. “Al Davis is
going to do what's best for Al Davis,” allowed Te x Schramm. “On the
other hand, he is a sentimental person.”
So was Rozelle, who began weeping earlier in the day when informing
his closest aides, again when informing the owners during the executive
session, and once more when dropping the bombshell on the press.
Concluding his brief remarks to the media with understated simplicity,
he stammered, “and, uh … It's been a great thirty years.” There were a
few questions about the timing of the decision, and then someone asked
him to assess his own impact on the game, but he demurred. “I'll have to
take some time to think about that. I don't think I can give you an
intelligent answer to that right now.”
With the announcement of his exit, Rozelle rang down the curtain on
the most successful commissioner's tenure in American sports. His
departure also ushered in the league's most convulsive and widespread
period of internal transition since the merger. In addition to Rozelle's
exit, Bill Walsh had announced his retirement from pro coaching after
the 49ers won their third Super Bowl in eight seasons. Rozelle's main
ally and closest friend in football, Te x Schramm, was already preparing
to end his thirty-year tenure as president and general manager in Dallas,
as the Cowboys had changed hands earlier in the spring. But all of these
changes were instantly overshadowed by Rozelle's announcement.
Wellington Mara, one of the old guard of veteran owners placed on a
committee to search for a successor, said, “We will look for a man who
has read the pages of history and learned those lessons, and a man who
has the foresight to apply those visions to the future. We are searching
for the replacement to an irreplaceable man.”
Change was already in the air a month earlier, at the Indianapolis
scouting combine, where 300 of the nation's best seniors—and one
junior—were sprinting, working out, and submitting to physical exams
and interviews. The draft class of 1989 promised the deepest collection
of impact players in years, and though the first pick would be the
prototypical quarterback—UCLA's Troy Aikman—there were signs
elsewhere that a new era was dawning.

Tony Mandarich, the burly, pile-driving tackle from Michigan State,
whose tattooed biceps began a new trend in offensive lineman body art,
seemed an utterly different breed of offensive lineman, and he would be
the second player taken. Oklahoma State's Barry Sanders, who won the
Heisman Trophy as a junior, had received permission to enter the draft,
becoming the first true underclassman ever to do so. He would go third
overall.
Though the first three players taken were on offense, much of the talk
in Indianapolis was about the splendid group of prospects on the
defensive side of the ball. And by the end of the week, it was clear that
the real talisman of the draft, the symbol of the changing times, was a
Florida State defensive back named Deion Sanders.
In the five years since 1984, when the Supreme Court had struck down
the NCAA's control over college football telecasts, essentially
deregulating broadcasts and allowing major schools like Notre Dame and
Nebraska and Florida State to appear on national television seven or
eight times a season instead of only twice, a sea change had occurred in
the coverage of college football. Along with the rise of the cable sports
network ESPN, the deregulation of college football broadcasts meant
that widespread media coverage became a constant reality at the nation's
major college powers, propelling college football's stars into a much
more visible position in the American sporting pantheon.
Into that harsh light of publicity stepped the flamboyant Sanders, who
carefully cultivated his “Prime Time” persona at Florida State, where he
showed up for his final regular season game in a limousine, sporting a
top hat and tails. He was the nation's best defensive back, but he was
more celebrated for his outrageous, media-savvy personality.
At the combine, Sanders exuded an air of not just cocky confidence
but easy familiarity with the NFL executives in attendance. Sauntering to
the start of the 40-yard-dash timing area, he spotted Al Davis in a lower
row of the observation area and proclaimed, “Okay, Al, we're gonna run
this juuust this once.” It was lost on no one that just five or ten years
earlier, none of the players at the combine would have had the
confidence to approach Davis at all, much less to address him playfully
by his first name.

Heretofore, many in professional football had been ignorant of the
changes occurring in popular culture, especially the increased influence
of rap music and hip-hop on mainstream America. Coaches for
generations had routinely squelched the players’ right to self-expression
for the sake of the larger good. But with Sanders, and others like him,
players were arriving on the scene who were products of that culture,
and to understand them meant understanding something of the context
from which they emerged. Speaking from his home on the day of the
NFL draft, after Atlanta selected him fifth overall, Sanders boasted, “I'm
gonna ask for so much money, the Falcons are gonna have to put me on
layaway.”
One of the last meetings that the Arkansas businessman and diehard
Cowboys fan Jerry Jones took before purchasing the club in 1989 was
with Dan Burke, the CEO of Cap Cities, the company that owned ABC
and ESPN and was intimately involved with programming pro football.
Jones asked about the importance of NFL programming to the networks.
“Frankly, we can't do without it,” Burke told Jones. “And we really
need to make sure that we have a reasonable approach to it. It concerns
me. If something happened to Pete Rozelle, I would wonder if that thing
were going to be negotiated in a responsible way as far as the networks
were concerned.”
The scheduled forty-five-minute meeting stretched on for a couple of
hours, as encounters with Jones tended to do. After thanking Burke and
leaving, Jones walked out with a smile.
“Well, what do you think?” asked a friend.
“Two things,” said Jones. “First, it really has given me encouragement
toward buying the Cowboys. I'm glad to see the game is that strong
television-wise. Secondly, the last time I heard my negotiator being
bragged on by my opponent, I changed negotiators.”
Far removed in sense and sensibility from the patrician elders of the
league, the oil entrepreneur Jones was energetic, homespun, and frank, a
lifelong football fan who'd played on Arkansas's 1964 national
championship team. Contemplating his love for the game, he remarked
that “I don't know of any ticker-tape parades they give in this country
for anybody other than war heroes, astronauts or winning teams.”

Placing much of his personal fortune on the line, Jones paid $140
million for the Cowboys, a record sum for a professional sports franchise
at the time. He inherited a legendary team that had grown stale and
financially unsound.

On February 28, three days after reaching an agreement with previous
owner Bum Bright to buy the club, Jones came to Dallas to meet with his
choice for the Cowboys’ new head coach, the University of Miami's
fiercely driven Jimmy Johnson, who'd been his teammate at Arkansas.
They met for dinner at a Tex-Mex restaurant called Mia's, which turned
out not only to be a frequent hangout for journalists (the Dallas Morning
News’s Ivan Maisel discovered Jones and Johnson eating there), but also
Tom Landry's favorite restaurant. The next day, Jones flew to Austin and
gave Landry his walking papers, though only after Schramm urged him
to give Landry the news in person.
At the press conference in which he introduced Johnson as his new
head coach and sheepishly explained that he hadn't meant to offend
anyone with his firing of Landry, Jones also clarified the degree of
involvement he expected to have with his football team.
“I will sell my house in Little Rock and move to Dallas,” he said.“My
entire office and my entire business will be [the Cowboys’] complex. I
want to know everything there is to know, from player contracts to socks
and jocks and television contracts. This is my company, and I will be
making all the decisions. The Cowboys will be my life.”
Te x Schramm submitted his resignation on the day that the league
approved the Cowboys sale, taking the job as the commissioner of the
new World League of American Football, the developmental spring
league that the NFL was creating to try to sell pro football in Europe. But
even if there hadn't been a choice position waiting for him, Schramm
wouldn't have abided working for Jones.
“You could tell right from the beginning that he didn't give a damn
about history,” Schramm said. “You can tell this man has absolutely no
feeling for the past. You almost expected him to take the stars off the
helmets.” Schramm packed up his files one morning, and left the
Cowboys’ lavish Valley Ranch complex, which he'd envisioned and
created. It would be more than fourteen years before he so much as

drove by it again.
In place of Tom Landry's lofty detachment, Cowboys fans would be
treated to another native Texan coaching their team, although one who
was decidedly more open with his emotions. Johnson's face was round
and fleshy, like a million chubby Texas good ol’ boys, but he exuded a
burning, consternated intensity. He had grown up in Port Arthur, right
on the Gulf of Mexico, a bright but uncurious jock who loathed his
classmate, the hippie chick Janis Joplin (the feeling, by all reports, was
mutual), and who had learned racial tolerance and understanding from
sports.
In the late ’80s, Johnson's teams at the University of Miami had been
highly successful and widely disliked. Football coaches had for years
spoken of players executing and carrying out their assignments in terms
of “expressing themselves.” Johnson's Hurricanes expressed themselves
with a thoroughly modern swagger; they were taunting, dominating,
preening clubs, whose players oozed with a confidence that was
intimidating to some and viewed as unsportsmanlike by many.
“We had a lot of black players out front,” Johnson would recall later.
“I think a lot of the resentment came that way. The black players knew
that, and the black players knew how I felt. I don't know that there was
racism involved in the resentment, but there was some ignorance
involved—people who have had few dealings with other ethnic groups. I
mean real relationships, not getting somebody to clean your house.”
Football, of course, had always attracted hard cases, but in the decade
of the ’80s, the locus of national football talent had moved from the Rust
Belt of the industrial Midwest (where hard-bitten coal-miners’ sons had
defined toughness for much of the century) to the depressed and largely
rural South, where a new generation of blue-chip players, mostly black,
displayed a toughness with a harder, more contemporary sheen. One of
Johnson's best players at Miami had been the wide receiver Michael
Irvin. Drafted by the Cowboys in 1988, Irvin had been the fifteenth of
seventeen children, and had developed a deep and abiding hunger for
the trappings of success (“I crave things,” Irvin said) and the spotlight.
Johnson brought some of this attitude, and some more of these players,
with him to Dallas.

There would be no honeymoon for the new regime—Jones's graceless
handling of the Landry firing made sure of that—and the first season
only exacerbated the problem. Bereft of speed (Irvin tore his anterior
cruciate ligament and missed the season), and lacking a pass rush, the
Cowboys were below average in all phases of the game. But in the midst
of the woeful 1-15 campaign, in which Jones and Johnson would be
mocked as two yahoos out of their depth in the big leagues, they
executed the deal that would hasten the Cowboys’ rise back to the top of
the NFL.
The Cowboys’ most marketable player was Herschel Walker, whom
Schramm had cannily drafted after the 1984 season, and signed after the
USFL folded in 1986. As the spearhead of Landry's declining offense,
Walker had put up two 1,000-yard seasons, but Johnson wasn't
convinced he'd still be a premium back by the time the Cowboys rose
again.
The Minnesota Vikings were convinced they were just one powerful
running back away from a run at the Super Bowl, and coveted Walker.
Their GM, Mike Lynn, was so desperate to acquire Walker that he paid a
fearsome price: seven draft choices (three in the first round, three in the
second, and one in the third) and five players.
While Walker and the Vikings struggled in the aftermath, the Cowboys
used their newfound arsenal of picks to bring an influx of young, fresh
bodies, many of whom the Cowboys’ coaching staff—largely brought in
from Johnson's Miami staff—had coached or coached against. Before it
was all over, Em-mitt Smith, Russell Maryland, Darren Woodson, and
Kevin Smith all came to Dallas as part of the Walker trade.
“At the time, I knew that some kind of deal was going down on
Herschel,” recalled Giants GM George Young. “Right before I went to
bed that night, I heard about the deal that Minnesota had given Dallas. I
didn't sleep at all that night. I knew the Dallas Cowboys weren't going to
be down on the bottom very long.”
Though the NFL found itself in a far different place than it had been
the last time it picked a new commissioner—after Bert Bell's death in
1959—the succession struggle following Rozelle would turn out to be at
least as confounding and paralyzing as the previous one. The subsequent

election would require fewer ballots (twelve rather than twenty-three),
but would set daunting records for search committees (three different
ones) and elapsed time (seven months, four days).
The lone recommendation of the original search committee, composed
entirely of old-guard owners, was veteran administrator Jim Finks, the
longtime Vikings and Saints executive. But Finks, while universally
liked, was just a year younger than Rozelle, and seemed a cautious,
transitional choice. After a summer of wrangling, and the drafting of
another search committee, a protracted deadlock developed between
those supporting Finks and a group pushing for Paul Tagliabue, the
league's lead counsel. Tagliabue hardly seemed a revolutionary, but he'd
stressed the need to focus on new ways of increasing revenues and
promised, if elected, to break with tradition and involve himself directly
in the collective bargaining process. The standoff lingered through the
summer, and the drafting of a second search committee, and into the
fall, with neither side—the old guard supporting Finks or the “Chicago
Eleven” group of mostly new owners who were pushing for Tagliabue—
willing to budge. An early October meeting in Dallas yielded no progress
and, after waiting seven months to vacate the job from which he had
retired, Rozelle grew increasingly impatient with the intransigence of
both sides. He drafted one more committee, and told them, “You've got
twenty-four hours to come up with a unanimous recommendation, or
we're going to throw both names out and start over again.” Finally, the
supporters for Finks relented and Tagliabue was elected on the twelfth
ballot.
Once again, the new commissioner was in the bathroom when he got
the news: Tagliabue was shaving when Rozelle called his Washington
home at 6:30 the next morning, urging him and his wife to fly to
Cleveland immediately to meet the owners and press.
Paul Tagliabue and his wife, Chan, would discover very quickly that
he'd experienced more than a promotion. After returning that night to a
celebration dinner in D.C., he and Chan arrived home at 11:30. Their
daughter, Emily, watching a movie in the den, greeted them and said,
“Here's a phone number. President Reagan's in Japan and he wants you
to call him.”
“Yeah, right,” said Tagliabue.

“No, he's called three times in the last hour,” said Emily. “He keeps
calling and interrupting my movie. He's going off someplace the next
morning in Tokyo and is leaving his hotel. He said it's urgent that you
call him as soon as you can be reached.”

Tagliabue didn't know the former president, and he and Chan had
never been invited for a White House dinner. But Reagan was a fan, and
had wanted to congratulate Tagliabue on the position. Inevitably, the
former president advised him to “Win one for the Gipper.”
The task of succeeding the man generally regarded as the greatest
commissioner in sports history would carry with it challenges beyond
what the commissioner left on his desk. And it would prove to be a
particularly hard case for Paul Tagliabue. Authoritative and confident in
daily life, he had a tendency to look stiff and a bit goofy in front of TV
cameras, his conservative suits and oversized tortoiseshell glasses hiding
an athlete's physique, and his legalistic answers at times obscuring his
deep convictions.
But if it was Tagliabue's fate to never be seen as living up to the image
of Pete Rozelle, it was a burden he could bear. Tall (6-foot-5), tough,
and scrupulously honest (he would later say he never remembered
cheating at any contest anytime in his life), he brought a formidable
intellect, an implacable persistence, and a resolute sense of duty to any
task he confronted. Lacking Rozelle's light touch and easy manner,
Tagliabue would have to work harder, and was prepared to do so. He'd
been doing it all his life.
He came from a family of strivers. His father, Charles, was a roughhewn, self-reliant second-generation American who started his own
construction company in New Jersey. Paul was the third of four
children, all boys, who grew up in a two-story walk-up in Jersey City.
Charles Tagliabue's boys were encouraged, though never coddled, and
taught, “If you don't want to break your back, you better learn how to
work with your head.”
Though Paul was recruited by Frank McGuire to become part of the
New York pipeline of schoolboy talent recruited to basketball
powerhouse North Carolina, he instead took a scholarship at
Georgetown, where he became the school's single-season rebounding

leader (a record that stood for decades, to be broken by Patrick Ewing).
Next came a full academic scholarship to New York University Law
School, where he met Chan, a bright, vivacious belle from Georgia. After
a three-year stint at the Pentagon, where he was intimately involved
with military strategic planning for the U.S. and its NATO allies, Tagliabue accepted a job at Covington & Burling, which had been wooing him
for years. After twenty years—and over fifty cases in which he'd
represented the league—Tagliabue assumed the commissionership.
The baton was passed at midnight on November 6, 1989. Rozelle,
batting out one last note on his Royal typewriter at the Park Avenue
office, took a few minutes to commit to writing some career reflections,
never published. Headed “Thinking Back on Retirement,” the two-page
document began with his reflections of the 1960 election at the
Kenilworth, and then worked back to his time with the Rams and the
University of San Francisco. In his distinctive, all-lower-case type,
Rozelle wrote, “Summing up and looking back I would have to say that
there has been more than a little luck involved in my career. Have often
recalled something I was told in a church summer camp. Character is
what you are as a person and reputation is what people think of you. If
you have a bad reputation you might as well have a bad character. So
always worked very hard and tried not to alienate any more than
necessary. If there was a secret to my success must have been a
combination of luck and remembering that summer camp admonition.”
For Tagliabue, the biggest surprise of his first year was how little he
had to do with the actual games themselves. “I took over on a Monday,”
Tagliabue said,“and then the following week the whole country was in a
dither about the slate of games. I hadn't spent two minutes on anything
to do with the games, and every week that would happen. You kind of
say, ‘How the hell does that happen?’ You're in charge of the
organization and you don't have anything to do with what's going on. It's
still the case.”
He more than compensated for that during the rest of the week. He
attacked the job just as he would a complex case, throwing himself into
it completely. Staffers marveled at his ability to read everything and
wondered where he found the time to do so. “I think at the beginning,
people were shocked by how hands-on Paul was,” said executive director

Don Weiss.“He became an ex officio member of every committee, from
expansion to realignment—the typical lawyer's approach. If you can't
meet today, well how about tomorrow, even if it is a holiday or a
Saturday?”
It was quickly apparent that Tagliabue wouldn't merely carry on
Rozelle's policies. Rozelle had installed a steroids-testing program, over
the objections of the Players Association in 1988, the efficacy of which
had been largely clouded by the players’ suspicion of the methods of Dr.
Forest Tennant, the head of the league's drug program. Tagliabue
elicited Tennant's resignation, and began overhauling the substance
abuse program.
Tagliabue also was more willing than Rozelle to use the office as a
bully pulpit. When Bengals coach Sam Wyche balked at allowing a
female reporter into the Cincinnati locker room, Tagliabue fined him a
week's pay, the largest fine of a coach in league history. When Arizona
voters rejected a referendum to recognize Martin Luther King, Jr.’s,
birthday as a state holiday, Tagliabue recommended that the league
move the 1993 Super Bowl, previously awarded to Phoenix, out of the
state entirely. (The league did so the following spring, promising
Phoenix the game in 1996 if it subsequently recognized the King
holiday.) The league also gained a concession from the networks, which
agreed not to discuss point spreads or other gambling-related
information in pregame shows. These were symbolic gestures, for sure,
but proved to be important ones, not only for the message sent to fans,
but for the ones sent to the players.
Tagliabue's first major decision in the public eye came in January
1991, when Operation Desert Storm was launched just days prior to the
conference championship games. The games went on, amid scattered
protest that it was disrespectful to do so. The Washington Post’s Shirley
Povich, who'd covered World War II, offered a contrasting view: “It is
curious why pro football seems to have been fingered as the target for
showing our solemn concern for the sacred lives of our men and women
in the desert. Other businesses and activities seem to have escaped this
responsibility.”
The war was already well along a week later, and there was little
question that the Super Bowl would go ahead as scheduled. At the press

conference the Friday before the game, Tagliabue articulated the curious
position the league found itself in. “We are trying to have a tone and a
theme for the game,” he said, “that will recognize not only that it's the
twenty-fifth Super Bowl, the Silver Anniversary Super Bowl football
game, but also an event that's being played against the backdrop of some
very grave developments in the Middle East.”
In the end, people watched for the reasons they usually watched. The
Super Bowl's ratings were aided by the closeness of the game, in which
the underdog Giants, playing ball-control offense, ground out a 20–19
win that wasn't clinched until Buffalo's Scott Norwood missed a field
goal in the closing seconds.

Following the Giants’ win over the Bills, the balance of power remained
firmly planted in the NFC's Eastern Division, which beginning with the
Giants’ win would boast five of the next six Super Bowl champions. In
1991, it was the Washington Redskins winning it all, giving Joe Gibbs
his third championship, with his third different Super Bowl quarterback,
in ten years.
But even then, a new dynasty—perhaps the NFL's last, as it would turn
out—was being built in Dallas. Even before their 1-15 debacle in 1989,
the Cowboys took advantage of the liberalized “Plan B” free agency
rules, which allowed teams to sign without compensation any player not
on another team's thirty-seven-player protected list. By 1990, with their
pro scouting system in place, Dallas signed Jay Novacek, a tight end
from the Cardinals. Novacek would catch 59 passes in his first year in
Dallas (and would soon begin a string of five consecutive Pro Bowl
appearances), and with the return of a healthy Michael Irvin and the
arrival of rookie running back Emmitt Smith, the Cowboys jumped from
1-15 to 7-9. A year later, Johnson guaranteed that the Cowboys would
be a playoff team, and they backed up his boast, going 11-5 and
upsetting the Bears in an NFC divisional playoff.
In 1992, the Cowboys opened with an upset win over the defending
champion Redskins, then marched to a conference-best 13-3 record, with
a defense anchored by speed rusher Charles Haley (acquired for two
draft choices from San Francisco, who couldn't handle the

temperamental end any longer) and Chad Hennings (an Air Force
Academy graduate, and another late-round steal acquired by Schramm
in his last draft). Offensively, the team's stout, punishing offensive line
cleared gaping holes for the slippery fireplug Emmitt Smith. Meanwhile,
the maturing quarterback Troy Aikman had lived up to his billing as a
classic pro-style leader, and Michael Irvin and Alvin Harper proved a
lethal wideout tandem, with Novacek punishing teams when Aikman
checked down to him on intermediate routes.
Johnson's crowing locker room mantra—“How ’Bout Them
Cowboys!?!” —became a rallying cry for the team, which seemed to
thrive in the media spotlight that others found daunting. The Cowboys’
52–17 rout of Buffalo in Super Bowl XXVII became at the time the most
watched television program in American history, viewed by an estimated
133.4 million Americans.
And it was clear, in the wake of the Super Bowl win, that it was only
the beginning. As Paul Zimmerman wrote in Sports Illustrated, “Troy
Aikman and Emmitt Smith and Michael Irvin and Ken Norton Jr. and
Charles Haley—all those implements of destruction that embarrassed
and humiliated a proud, battle-tested team are just starting to feel their
oats. Coach Jimmy Johnson and his hair spray; Jerry Jones, the owner
who hungers for the limelight. You say you're tired of them already?
Gee, that's tough, because the whole gang's going to be with us for a
while.” America's Team was back.
Five years earlier, in 1987, during a late night negotiating session on
the eve of the NFL bringing in replacement players, NFL Players
Association executive director Gene Upshaw sat across from Tex
Schramm and, once again, explained why the union was adamant about
getting some form of free agency.
“You're not going to get it!” barked Schramm. “You're not going to get
it in five years, you're not going to get it in ten years, you're not ever
going to get it. Don't you see? You're the cattle, we're the ranchers!”
That philosophy informed much of the late ’80s in negotiating, though
there was more than simple hardheadedness at work. For executives like
Schramm, who'd viewed the game as a laboratory of team building, the
prospect of unfettered free agency went against all the precepts that

guaranteed equality of opportunity. He may have been reactionary, but
no one doubted he was sincere: Tex Schramm, and many others like him,
really did believe that free agency would ruin the game of professional
football.

By the end of his tenure, Pete Rozelle was beginning to disagree. He
despaired at the acrimonious state of relations, and had begun to
question whether his policy of trying to remain strictly above the fray
had been the wisest idea. During his final months in office, he was
taking a more conciliatory stance. “Maybe what Ed Garvey was talking
about a few years back—that some owners found distasteful—really was
a good solution after all. He had wanted 55 percent of the team revenues
for the players’ salaries, pensions, etc., and everyone pooh-poohed it,
including myself. They would grab it today.”
On the morning of Super Bowl XXIII, just two months before his
retirement announcement, Rozelle brought together the Players
Association and Management Council and tried to barter an agreement.
But even the limited free agency plan on the table—granting players free
agency after seven years in the NFL—was rejected by the Management
Council. And yet in light of the free agency offered in other sports, and
the series of rulings that went against the league in the ’80s, free agency
was clearly coming.
Among the first people to talk about the labor issue with Tagliabue after
he took office was Al Davis, who said he felt that Jack Donlan (the
league's lead negotiator, soon dismissed by Tagliabue) and the
Management Council had, for much of the decade, showed disrespect to
the Players Association, attempting to bully them. But Upshaw was not a
man easily bullied. “You're dealing with an educated guy who wants to
get something done,” said Davis. “All of you have built up a stereotype.
You've painted them as militants, when all they want is equal rights.”
Though Tagliabue and Upshaw were on opposite ends of many legal
battles, they had developed a warm personal relationship. In the ’80s,
while still at Covington & Burling, Tagliabue would see Upshaw
occasionally and would invariably tell him, “Don't give up; keep pushing
for a solution.” Upshaw had sensed that Tagliabue could provide a break

with the past, and had been pulling for his election throughout the
summer of 1989. Like a wise general who knows better than anyone the
horrors of war, Tagliabue was an attorney determined not to spend the
next decade the way Pete Rozelle had spent the previous one.

Though Tagliabue and Upshaw had dozens of meetings in the first
three years of his tenure, it was clear that both men's constituencies
were waiting for the next legal outcome to dictate their strategy. It came
in the federal district court in Minneapolis, where Judge David Doty
presided over a suit involving Jets running back Freeman McNeil and
several other NFL players. The jury trial for the McNeil case came in
with a verdict on September 9, 1992, finding that the Plan B free agency
system violated antitrust law by being more restrictive than was
necessary to achieve competitive balance. But the damages phase of the
trial offered minimal relief (with only four of the eight plaintiffs
receiving damages, totaling $543,000), and the verdict left room for the
NFL to adopt a slightly less restrictive plan that could lightly loosen the
system and which would have to be tried in court all over again.
By then, negotiations had grown serious, and another case—this one
involving All-Pro defensive end Reggie White—was being heard by Doty.
In late December of 1992, Judge Doty sat both sides down in his
chambers, and showed them a sealed envelope. He warned them that
inside was his solution, and it was a solution that neither side would
like. Though both sides would later question whether Doty's threat was
an empty one—“I still don't think there was anything at all in that damn
envelope,” said Upshaw—it pushed both the players and management
toward a compromise.
And over the next days, the two sides came to a solution that had been
sitting on the table, really, for four decades. In 1953, while handing
down his decision upholding blackouts of home games in the NFL, Judge
Allan Grim moved far afield and noted, “In order to try to keep its teams
and approximately equal strength and to protect weaker teams from
stronger teams, a league theoretically might use a number of devices.”
Grim went on to list seven possible methods, including “(5) limit the
total amount of salaries which a team can pay.”
The idea became a cornerstone of a new agreement, which gave
players unrestricted free agency after four years in the league. The

agreement also ingeniously added an evergreen clause, which
encouraged both sides to extend the contract before it expired. In the
last year of the contract, the owners would lose their cap, and the
eligibility for free agency would kick up from four years to six years.
Suddenly, after a quarter-century of haggling, the players had achieved a
sizable percentage of the gross (it would work out to around 65 percent,
once the cap went into effect) and true free agency.
The agreement accomplished something that would prove even more
important: by establishing a sense of proportion that guaranteed players
almost two thirds of every dollar the NFL made, it made the players
partners of the owners in more than rhetorical terms.
But there was still some resistance from both sides. “We had been so
used to a system that had virtually no movement in terms of free
agency,” said Carmen Policy, then the president and CEO of the 49ers.
“To accept free agency was worse than having to go through
chemotherapy. Chemotherapy's supposed to cure cancer, whereas free
agency's a form of cancer itself.” Among some players, there was a
similar distaste for a cap. The Cowboys’ Irvin correctly viewed it as a
move that would cost the game's biggest stars money. “Free agency with
a cap is like no free agency,” he said. Irvin would be the most vocal of
the plan's critics, and he tangled angrily with Upshaw at a meeting in the
Cowboys’ locker room in May 1993.
But for a generation of players who'd been through the decades-long
battle for recognition, there was no doubt that the agreement was a
victory. Shortly after a spate of player criticism made the news, Upshaw
received a phone message in his office from John Mackey, the head of
the NFLPA in the early ’70s who'd mortgaged the end of his own career
to sue the NFL over the Rozelle Rule. “I read what those ungrateful
S.O.B. players are saying about the new agreement,” said Mackey. “Tell
them they can kiss your ass. You're doing a great job.”
There would still be loopholes that would have been better closed, but
with the agreement, the NFL, already the nation's most popular spectator
sport, added a modern economic structure that would make sense both
financially and competitively. On August 12, 1994, when the Major
League Baseball Players Association went out on strike, the contrast
couldn't have been any greater. It called to mind the old Edward Bennett

Williams quote, “The only thing dumber than a dumb football owner is a
smart baseball owner.”
Of course, Major League Baseball, even in its rancorous ineptitude,
continued to possess one thing that the NFL didn't have, a broad
antitrust exemption that could be used to block arbitrary and capricious
franchise moves. It was one loophole that neither Rozelle nor Tagliabue,
to their eternal regret, had been able to close.

22

Pearl Harbor

I

n Kansas City, Lamar Hunt still went to the games, still worried over
the tiny details, still lived and died with the fortunes of his football
team. But through the ’70s and ’80s, his once proud franchise fell into a
cycle of house-cleaning, renewed promise, and dashed expectations, and
the reputation of the Chiefs began to fade.
Arrowhead Stadium, the magnificent structure built as a result of
Chiefs victories of the ’60s, witnessed little but failure in the ’70s and
’80s. From 1974 to 1988, the team sold out just three games, and
became better known for its turmoil: the accidental drowning death of
running back Joe Delaney in 1983; the sad picket line scuffle in 1987
between striking linebacker Jack Del Rio and Chiefs great Otis Taylor, by
then a scout for the team; the 1988 revelation that head coach Frank
Gansz had lied about his military record.
Through it all, Hunt remained polite, supportive, and slightly
withdrawn, and this ceaseless composure came to rankle his closest
friends, who knew how competitive he really was.
“I've never heard him say a derogatory remark about anyone,”
marveled lifelong friend Buddy Rupe. “I'd call Al Davis ‘the biggest
asshole that ever drew a breath of air.’ And Lamar would say, ‘Well, at
times he can be difficult.’ I just want to slap him upside the head. ‘He's
not difficult, Lamar—he's a shit-head!’ ”
Finally, at the end of the 1988 season, in which the 4-12 Chiefs played
in front of sparse crowds and more than a quarter-million empty seats,
Hunt took action. He fired Gansz and GM Jim Schaff, and bumped

longtime president Jack Steadman to the role of chairman of the board.
In his place came the tanned, restless, and ultra-competitive outsider,
Carl Peterson, who took the lofty titles of president, general manager,
and chief operating officer. Despite mirrored shades, feathered hair, and
tailored suits, Peterson was a football lifer with a blend of talents
uniquely suited to the modern game.
In the past, most “football people” dealt with football alone, and left
business concerns to an administrative staff. But Peterson was part of a
new breed who, following Tex Schramm's trailblazing example, excelled
at both. In Kansas City, Peterson didn't just overhaul the team's scouting
apparatus, he rebuilt its community presence as well. He toured six
states to drum up support and commissioned market studies to better
understand the team's fan base. The existing fan base was an aging,
dispirited lot, seeking credibility above all else. Rather than making any
outlandish claims for his new regime, Peterson developed a series of TV
commercials, shot in gritty black-and-white, that showed players
working out in preparation for the new season, and closed with the
phrase, “No Promises, No Excuses.”
His first choice as head coach, his close friend Dick Vermeil, turned
him down, choosing to stay retired. Peterson was casting about for other
candidates when one of the best coaches in the NFL dropped in his lap.
Marty Schottenheimer had just led the Browns to their fourth straight
playoff season, particularly impressive in light of a plague of quarterback
injuries. Yet after the season, Modell and Schottenheimer had clashed
over his assistants, and he resigned.
Schottenheimer's fundamental approach and Teutonic resolve worked
as well in Kansas City as it had in Cleveland, and the results were nearly
instantaneous: the team went 8-7-1 in 1989, barely missing the playoffs,
then went 11-5 in 1990, advancing to the postseason for only the second
time in twenty seasons. The team's season ticket base of 26,000 in 1988
grew within four years to more than 71,000, with a waiting list of
15,000, and the Chiefs would lead the league in attendance six times
during the ’90s. It wasn't just the wins in Arrowhead that were different;
Peterson helped transform the game day experience, bringing in a team
mascot and adding rock music at key intervals (becoming perhaps the
first team to pump the opening chords of the Rolling Stones’ “Start Me

Up” prior to kickoff), as well as moving the team's radio contract to an
FM rock station that would bring a younger audience.
And like the best football coaches, Schottenheimer helped change the
personality of the team. As in Cleveland, Schottenheimer's teams did
things right, playing sound, bruising defense and conservative, ballcontrol offense. The first draft choice of the new era was the versatile
edge rusher Derrick Thomas, a game-breaking linebacker who quickly
became the anchor of a ferocious Chiefs defense that already had one of
the game's best secondaries.
There had been talk, after the Royals’ rise in the ’70s and their World
Series title in 1985, that Kansas City had become a baseball town. But as
soon as the Chiefs placed a credible team on the field, the city swung
back around again. Beginning in 1990, the team went to the playoffs
seven times in eight seasons, and Arrowhead—a sterile, empty bowl for
much of its history—was transformed into one of the toughest places in
the league for road teams to visit. By October 6, 1991, when Kansas City
played at home on Monday Night Football for the first time in eight years,
the team was greeted by an otherworldly din that lasted throughout the
33–6 dismantling of the defending conference champion Bills. “I've never
seen anything like that in my life, before or since,” said Tony Dungy,
then an assistant for the Chiefs.
What the team meant to the city was no less real for being so
ineffable. As Mike Davis, a Kansas City attorney put it, “You'll never get
100,000 people together because you bought a Van Gogh at the Nelson
Gallery. Sports is the principal unifying force in the metro area.” Outside
the stadium on game days, the 30,000-space parking lot became a haven
for tailgating and barbecuing, while inside the raucous crowd developed
an intimidating reputation, wreaking havoc on opposing teams, and
causing seven false-start penalties for the Broncos’ frustrated offense in a
1993 Monday night game. The team and its stadium had served as a
social magnet, the kind of cohesive, mobilizing event that occurred with
less regularity in sprawling modern societies. “Without the Chiefs and
the Royals,” said Kansas City Mayor Emanuel Cleaver, “we'd be Omaha
… Wichita … Des Moines.”
There were only twenty-seven cities that enjoyed the cachet of an NFL
franchise, and many others had long clamored for the opportunity. With

labor peace finally achieved, the NFL announced at its annual meetings
in 1993 that it would expand, for the first time in sixteen years. The
wave of politicking that the announcement set off was another indicator
of the league's preeminent position in American sports. Since 1974,
when the NFL selected Tampa Bay and Seattle to join the league
(beginning play in 1976), the other major sports leagues had expanded
numerous times: Major League Baseball had grown by four clubs, and
both the NBA and NHL had added nine teams. But it was the first NFL
expansion in two decades, and the suitors campaigned with a special
fervor.
For the cities that had lost NFL franchises in the ’80s, the expansion
offered the promise of a kind of redemption. No city viewed its
candidacy with greater fervor than Baltimore, still haunted by the Colts’
escape in 1984. The Colts marching band had stuck together since the
team left, and still gathered to play at an empty Memorial Stadium every
Sunday that the Indianapolis Colts had a home game. With the prospect
of the NFL's return, the city mobilized. There was already a guarantee
from Maryland lawmakers that, if and when a franchise came to
Baltimore, $200 million in stadium funds would be approved. The
coming expansion also offered an opportunity for growing cities in the
Sun Belt to make their case that they belonged on the national stage, and
among the five finalists—with Baltimore and St. Louis—were three cities
in the Southeast, Charlotte, Memphis, and Jacksonville.
The assumption all along had been that the league might pick one
“new” market and another “old” market in tandem. But at the expansion
vote in Chicago on October 26, the league could only agree on one
entry, unanimously approving the Charlotte bid. On November 30, the
league surprised all the remaining parties by selecting Jacksonville, the
nation's fifty-fourth TV market and a group considered such a long shot
that it had dropped out of the process earlier in the year.
The shock from the news was felt around the country, and most
especially in St. Louis and Baltimore. The feeling of resentment was
exacerbated in the latter city by Tagliabue's seemingly patronizing
comments following the announcement. When asked what advice he
would give a city like Baltimore, which had waited a decade for a
chance at a new franchise and been denied, the commissioner curtly

said, “We didn't force anybody to get involved in this process. That's a
judgment call people have to make. Maybe they prefer to have a
museum or plant in their town.”
A bereft John Steadman, longtime writer for the Baltimore Sun, wrote
a letter to Rozelle lashing out at the league's new leaders. “Tagliabue
had every chance to correct a wrong, to wipe out much hostility in the
affair Irsay, to clean up the past—and he didn't do it…. You ought to be
so pleased to be away from it all, a bunch of cold over-bearing men who
have no idea what the NFL is all about.”
It would soon enough become apparent that in solving one set of
problems, the league had created another.
The beginning of the 1993 season brought the advent of free agency,
phased in a year ahead of the accompanying salary cap. The defending
champion Cowboys opened 0-2 while star running back Emmitt Smith
held out. But after he signed, Dallas went on to win twelve of its
remaining fourteen regular season games, then vanquished the 49ers
again in the NFC title game. In a Super Bowl rematch against the cursed
Bills, making their fourth consecutive trip, Dallas marched to an easy
30–13 win.
The Cowboys were clearly ensconced as America's Team and a
budding dynasty. Equally clear in the media-glutted environment of the
’90s was that the Bills’ repeated failure in the big game served to brand
them as the ultimate losers, the butt of late-night jokes and object of a
tormenting series of “How does it feel?” queries. On the Monday
following Super Bowl XXVIII, the Bills’ fourth straight Super Bowl loss,
the David Letterman show included the list of “Top Ten Things Buffalo
Bills Coach Marv Levy Said at Halftime.” (No. 3: “Okay, boys—get out
there and start sucking.”)
Meanwhile, the second straight Super Bowl win had further elevated
the reputations of Jerry Jones and Jimmy Johnson, and the Cowboys
were given a good chance of becoming the first team ever to win three
consecutive Super Bowls. Behind the scenes, however, others on the
Cowboys’ staff were beginning to sense the growing strain between the
two. By March, Jones and Johnson, the jubilant revelers at two
consecutive Super Bowl parties, were grim-faced at a Dallas press

conference, in which they jointly announced Johnson's abrupt exit as
head coach (accounts differed on whether the coach had resigned or
been fired).
It was evident by Johnson's exit that Jones didn't merely want the
Cowboys to succeed; it was important to him that he be seen as the
primary architect of the Cowboys juggernaut. Implicit in this was his
choice for Johnson's replacement. Jones had mused that “any of 500
people, probably including me” could lead the Cowboys to a Super Bowl,
and he hired the deposed University of Oklahoma coach Barry Switzer,
the self-proclaimed “bootlegger's boy” who'd been a graduate assistant
on the 1964 Arkansas team on which Jones and Johnson had been
teammates.
While Jones thirsted for the spotlight from football fans, he'd already
earned plenty of attention, and grudging respect, from many of his
fellow owners. Jones's manner lacked subtlety, but his fierce business
instincts helped him see opportunities that others might have missed,
and that fervent drive would serve more than just the Cowboys.
In 1992, in the midst of a depressed economic environment, with the
TV networks claiming tens of millions of dollars of losses on their NFL
coverage, Art Modell negotiated a deal for the league that would provide
the networks with a $230 million rebate for the 1992 season, in
exchange for extending the contract two additional years. The move
garnered the support of Tagliabue, who before a special meeting to
discuss the issue called it “the most important business decision that'll be
made this decade.” But with Jones and Philadelphia's Norman Braman
leading the opposition, the rebate plan was voted down. The rejection
stung Modell—who resigned after thirty years as the league's
Broadcasting Committee chairman—and further established Jones as a
rising presence in the league.
A year later, the wisdom of Jones's strident optimism was ratified.
When the league opened negotiations for the new contract, a significant
bounce had occurred in the advertising market, and a crucial new player
—Rupert Murdoch's fledgling Fox network—was vying for a contract.
The result was a stunning four-year, $4.38 billion deal that nearly
doubled teams’ television revenue again.

In the place of CBS's tradition, the league would align its most visible
conference with an unknown entity. Fox was without a sports division,
and a vast majority of its 139 stations were on the UHF band, but
Murdoch was convinced that an NFL deal would be a ticket to the big
time. He well understood that the NFL made the network instantly
respectable, and the contract alone led to dozens of channel and affiliate
switches, in which Fox moved to more desirable spots.
The deal ushered in a new era of business growth for the league,
hastened by Tagliabue's 1991 appointment of the investment banker and
former Showtime chief Neil Austrian as the new league president,
overseeing the league's business interests. But most importantly, the new
network deal reaffirmed the faith that Jones and others showed that,
even in hard financial times, the rights to NFL broadcasts remained the
most valuable commodity on television.
In any profound change to a complex system, the Law of Unintended
Consequences will inevitably take effect. And when the NFL went to its
first season with the salary cap, in 1994, the law quickly asserted itself.
The league had argued for a “hard” cap, and had achieved it in principle.
But one of the stipulations of the collective bargaining agreement was
that any signing bonus a player received would be prorated over the life
of the contract (provided the player stayed on the roster throughout that
period). Signing bonuses were crucial for players, because they provided
the only guaranteed money they made, and with multiple teams
competing for players, the number and sizes of the bonuses skyrocketed.
The teams that were best able to afford those huge bonuses weren't
necessarily the clubs in the largest markets, but instead the clubs with
the best stadium deals, especially those in modern stadiums with more
luxury suites and revenue enhancements. Money from luxury suite
rentals, concession sales, and parking fees were not part of the 60-40
home-road split, so teams with newer stadiums or better rental
agreements or both enjoyed millions in extra revenue that wasn't shared
with the other clubs.
No one capitalized on the new economics more quickly than Jerry
Jones, who discovered a heretofore untapped revenue resource when, on
August 4, 1995, he announced a ten-year, $40 million sponsorship deal
with Pepsi. The league already had a soda sponsorship deal in place with

Coca-Cola, but Jones skirted the legality of the conflicting deal by
granting Pepsi “pouring rights” as the official soft drink of Texas
Stadium. Before the fall was over, he'd signed rich stadium sponsorship
deals with AT&T, American Express, and Nike, the last deal announced
during a Monday Night Football telecast, in which Jones and Nike
chairman Phil Knight walked the sidelines during halftime of the
Cowboys-Giants game, upstaging a retirement ceremony for the Giants’
Phil Simms. The deals seemed to strike at the heart of the league's
revenue-sharing arrangement, and threatened to supersede the national
deals that the league had struck. At the time, Tagliabue called the deal
“short-sighted and self-serving,” and within months, the league and
Jones were suing each other over perceived differences. In the
meantime, Jones signed Deion Sanders, who'd helped the 49ers break
the Cowboys’ two-year run the previous year, to a seven-year, $35
million deal with a $13 million signing bonus, and the Cowboys
embarked on a quest to win their third Super Bowl in four years.
Meanwhile, in Southern California, where the pleasures and
distractions of American life were unsurpassed, and where the sense of
community was the most tenuous, pro football was floundering. The
Rams, playing down in Anaheim, had fallen off the radar of many Los
Angeles sports fans, slumping to a 23-57 record in the first half of the
’90s, never recovering on the field from the absence of Eric Dickerson
and the inexplicable mid-career slump of quarterback Jim Everett. Both
the Rams and the Raiders needed new stadiums, but in a state battered
by riots and earthquakes, the issue was a political nonstarter.
As this discontent became apparent, so did the entreaties from the
jilted cities of the expansion process. Baltimore, flush with money from a
state lottery and with the funding already approved to build a new
stadium, had entered into negotiations with Al Davis, as well as other
franchises. So had the city of St. Louis, trying for more than a decade to
replace the Cardinals. Rosenbloom's widow, Georgia Frontiere (she'd
since remarried), exercised an escape clause in the Rams’ lease in 1994
and announced in January 1995 that the team was moving to St. Louis,
which offered a package that included a domed stadium, a state-of-theart practice facility in a lavish team complex, 100 percent of concession
revenue, and numerous other perks.

The problem, however, was that the Rams didn't meet the longstanding criterion, in place since 1984, of a team that needed to move for
its financial survival. The ensuing vote of 23–1 against the move,
prompted an immediate threat of legal action by Missouri attorney
general Jay Nixon, as well as the threat by the Rams that they would sue
the league in the very same way that Al Davis had done a decade earlier.
And so the league found itself at a crossroads. Fifteen years after the
beginning of the Raiders litigation, it faced the possibility of another
protracted dispute with another uncertain outcome. In the event, the
owners blinked. “The main consideration,” said Tagliabue, “was the
potential damage exposure of vetoing a deal that guaranteed a team, at
least in their view, I think the number was around $900 million over the
life of the lease, so arguably the damage exposure is three times $900
million, which is a significant amount of money.”
In April, the league voted again and the move was approved, in
exchange for a series of financial concessions from the Rams. And so the
Rams, which had spent fifty of their fifty-eight years of existence in
Southern California, prepared for a move to St. Louis. Pete Rozelle,
never publicly critical of the league or its owners, privately bemoaned
the loss of the team of his youth. And at Rams’ Horn restaurant in
suburban Sherman Oaks, owner and former All-Pro lineman Don Paul
put a new dish on the menu called “Lack of Ram.”
Suddenly, Al Davis and the Raiders were all alone in the nation's
number two market. The decade, which had begun with such promise,
with the team advancing to the AFC championship game in Art Shell's
first full season as head coach, had grown into a frustrating series of
good-but-not-great seasons made all the more aggravating by the
Raiders’ inability to beat the Chiefs, once again their archrival. After
winning thirteen division titles in twenty-four years, the Raiders would
spend another decade trying to win another, during which they went
through a stretch in which they lost eighteen of twenty games to the
Chiefs. Davis grew more eccentric by the year. He had been known to
show up to games wearing a black Raiders warm-up suit, then emerge
from a bathroom at halftime wearing a white Raiders warm-up suit. Art
Shell, despite compiling a 56-41 mark, was fired after the 1994 season.
While the Raiders hadn't replaced the Rams in the hearts of L.A.’s

longtime football fans, they did have an impact in the city. The Raiders’
colors and reputation resonated with many area rappers, and the L.A.
neighborhood of Compton—the same Compton where Pete Rozelle had
attended high school— had become the lodestar of the burgeoning West
Coast rap movement, with rappers such as Ice Cube, Eazy-E, and Ice-T
sporting Raiders jerseys and caps in their videos and promotional
photos. As the gang warfare in L.A. waxed, then waned, the
identification with the Raiders became more than a passing fad—for
some it was a means of survival. In an increasingly style-conscious urban
environment in which wearing red or blue could brand one as a member
of the Bloods or Crips, the black-and-silver of the Raiders’ jersey served
as a suitable compromise, one that connoted street toughness without
inciting attack or police suspicion.
But while the hip-hop community bought Raiders merchandise, it
didn't buy enough tickets to offset a gradual and lengthy attendance
slump. The aging Coliseum, restored to some of its earlier glory for the
1984 Summer Olympics, had by the mid-’90s fallen into disrepair. With
an absence of luxury boxes and interior concourses for concession sales,
the Coliseum was deemed unfit for the modern game. On June 23, 1995,
the Raiders announced an agreement to move back to Oakland. The
deal, eventually approved by the league, left the Los Angeles area
without a pro football team for the first time in a half-century.
In addition to the Rams and Raiders moves, the Patriots had been
negotiating for a possible move to St. Louis, the Buccaneers to Orlando,
and the Oilers to Nashville. In each case, teams were moving out of
larger markets and into smaller ones that were offering better stadium
deals. What all this meant, as dramatized by the Raiders and Rams
moves, was that Al Davis had been proved precisely wrong. It wasn't the
market size at all that was crucial. The most crucial element to each
team's relative revenue standing within the league was its stadium deal.
And within the league, there was a sense that tumultuous waters lay
ahead if the league couldn't find a way to keep its franchises in place.
Among those visibly alarmed was Art Modell, who said, “We can't
hopscotch franchises around the country. We have built this business on
the trust of fans. If we treat that as if it doesn't count, it isn't going to
wash.”

In contrast to the chaos and dissipation of Los Angeles, the ’90s began
with the city of Cleveland standing as one of the rocks on which the
NFL's identity rested. The Dawg Pound, inaugurated in the glory days of
the Browns’ resurgence in the mid-’80s, was still going strong, and as the
1995 season began Modell was universally and justifiably regarded as
one of the cornerstones of the NFL's old school.

Modell had suffered over the Browns’ near misses as deeply as the
city, and he was consumed with the idea of winning another world
championship. “I'd give up ten years off my life to get to a Super Bowl,”
he said in 1994. The Browns’ mid-’80s rise, nearly a decade old by this
time, had helped revive the city's fortunes, and contributed to a
renaissance of the downtown, with a new baseball stadium for the
Indians, a new basketball arena for the Cavaliers, and the Rock and Roll
Hall of Fame and Museum.
For years, Modell had been urging the city of Cleveland to help with
renovations to Cleveland Stadium. While never threatening—he'd vowed
that he would never move the team—he had become increasingly
insistent about the team's need for the full gamut of stadium
improvements. Cleveland mayor Mike White, with whom Modell had
tangled for much of the decade, was pushing for the improvements and
had even set up a referendum to extend the city's sin tax to appropriate
funds for the renovations. In July, Modell declared a moratorium on
talking about the vote so he could, he said, concentrate on football. Fans
in Cleveland assumed that they could do the same.
Modell had still not made any statements, either public or private, to
the league when, in late October after a league meeting, he stopped by
Tagliabue's office and mentioned, “At some point I'm going to need to
talk to you about my stadium situation.” Tagliabue had said that
sounded fine and invited Modell to call him anytime. But that was all
the warning that he or the league received prior to Friday, November 3,
1995, when the staggering news leaked that Modell had signed an
agreement to move the Browns to Baltimore.
It is difficult to overstate the impact of the move on the American
sporting landscape. Coming a year after the emotional toll taken by the
truncated 1994 baseball season, the news was a body blow that
disoriented the internal compass of fans in Cleveland and across the

country. Not since the Dodgers and Giants fled to the West Coast in 1958
had a franchise shift so jolted the sports world.
And to football fans, especially those in Cleveland, the move felt like a
sneak attack, the sporting equivalent of Pearl Harbor. For those who had
come of age secure in the womb of Rozelle's elaborate NFL universe, the
move was much more traumatic than either the Raiders’ or Colts’ exits.
Davis was a known rebel; Irsay was generally regarded as a buffoon, and
in both of those cases, the moves came as a culmination of months, even
years of public posturing. But to see Art Modell, for so long a pillar of
the league's one-for-all rhetoric, picking up and heading for a better deal
—without leaving the citizens of Cleveland so much as a last chance—
was shocking. “I felt like I lost a close relative,” said Browns legend Lou
Groza, who began weeping when he heard the news, and would never
again speak to Modell.
The game at Cleveland on Sunday, November 5, was a surreal exercise
in public anguish, with the crowd alternately sullen and raging by turns.
“It was the worst feeling I've had there, other than when Kennedy got
killed,” said Jim Brown, who'd been a special adviser to the team since
1993.“It was sort of like a dream out there today.”
In the stands, the leader of the Dawg Pound, the portly computer parts
salesman John Thompson, whose No. 98 jersey and dog mask were an
ever-present sight, wore only the jersey to the game. Asked why he
didn't wear the mask, the anguished Thompson replied, “You wouldn't
wear a dog mask to your brother's funeral, would you?”
Houston (another team in the turmoil of a pending move) won, 37–10,
and the postgame scene outside the Cleveland dressing room threatened
to turn ugly. A group of a few dozen fans, standing on a nearby
concourse, repeatedly shouted “Bring us Modell!” But Art Modell, for the
first time in his thirty-three years of owning the Browns, was not in
attendance. He would never again return to Cleveland.
The next morning Modell was in Baltimore, introduced by Mayor Kurt
Schmoke as “the owner of the Baltimore Browns,” and greeted with a
standing ovation.
“I didn't want to hold up the city of Cleveland,” said Modell years
later. “I would never do something like that.” This was cold comfort to

the team's fans. While it was true that, in the aftermath, Modell's
grievances were clearer, his means of redressing them were inconsistent
with the principles he'd espoused for much of his career.
On the shores of Lake Erie, the reaction was something close to
hysteria, not terribly different—in both the anguished tone of the
reaction and the distraught nature of the accompanying rhetoric—from
the feeling of civic betrayal heard in Rust Belt communities when auto
plants or other factories shut down and moved out. If anything, the
response was even more severe, because in this case, the company was
one with which most of the people in the city identified with, rooted for,
and, on Sundays, built their lives around.
The funereal scene at the stadium for the rest of the Browns’ games
that season was one of the saddest sights in football. The team played its
final home game of the season December 17, beating Cincinnati, 26–10.
After the contest, the Browns players circled the edge of the field,
shaking hands. Meanwhile, a sign on the Cleveland Stadium scoreboard,
trying to find the appropriate tone for the setting, rang particularly
hollow. It read:
BROWNS FANS,
YOU ARE UNIQUE AND YOUR SUPPORT THROUGH THE YEARS
HAS BEEN EXTRAORDINARY!
IT'S BEEN A GREAT RUN.
FORMER AND CURRENT BROWNS PLAYERS AND COACHES THANK YOU.
THANKS FOR BEING PART OF SOMETHING SPECIAL. THANK YOU VERY MUCH!

The irony that Baltimore, which had the Colts snatched from it in
1984, would now be the recipient of an equally shocking move was not
lost on the city's citizens. As the former governor William Donald
Schaefer, by then no longer in office, wrote in a terse note to Tagliabue,
“Old adage: ‘what goes around comes around.’ You could have avoided
all this turmoil if you had only played fair.”
So the three cities that lost NFL franchises in the ’80s—St. Louis,
Oakland, and Baltimore—had regained franchises in the ’90s, at the
expense of a mostly indifferent Los Angeles and an outraged Cleveland.
Houston, as well, was jilted. The Oilers would leave thirty-seven years of
often rabid fan support in Texas for uncharted territory in Tennessee,

where they settled in Nashville and were eventually rechristened the
Tennessee Titans. The era of franchise free agency had arrived. With the
media crying apocalypse, angry fans clogging the league's fax system
with letters of protest, and one of the most respected owners in the
league receiving death threats, Tagliabue faced the greatest crisis of his
tenure.
How had the best-managed sports league in the country come to such an
ignoble turn? The simplest answer was that over the fifty years of
postwar America, none of the three commissioners had been able to
secure meaningful federal antitrust protection that would have allowed
the league's owners to decide among themselves where the league's
franchises could be located.
But it was also true that the owners had, in many ways, betrayed their
own cause. They had bemoaned the Raiders’ move in 1982, but instead
of fighting for a bare-bones antitrust legislation that served to protect
against future moves, the league supported broader retroactive
legislation, which muddied the waters and lacked the support in
Congress to pass. It was also true that at least some of the owners didn't
want the legislation, but preferred to use the threat of a move to
generate greater concessions from their current municipalities.
Out of the chaos of the Cleveland move to Baltimore, one important
precedent was set. On February 8, 1996, Tagliabue announced that the
NFL had reached an agreement with the city of Cleveland that
guaranteed that the NFL would place an expansion team in Cleveland by
1999 and, in exchange for the city dropping any further legal action,
would allow Cleveland to retain rights to the Cleveland Browns name,
the team colors, nickname, and heritage. It was too little, too late, an
instance of pure damage control. But it was probably the best that could
be done under the circumstances, and would be a crucial element in
repairing relations with outraged Clevelanders.
In Southern California in 1996, an ailing Pete Rozelle battled a series of
cruel health setbacks. After nursing Carrie through a brain tumor he was
diagnosed with one of his own. As his health wavered and his activities

waned, he watched helplessly as the league he worked so hard to help
build was cast into a state of chaos.
But almost every day, he'd come into his office, just minutes away
from his house, to return calls and answer correspondence. His longtime
assistant, Thelma Elkjer, who'd returned to California in 1990, answered
his phones and handled his personal affairs.
Those mid-’90s years played out like a long valedictory for Rozelle. In
January of 1996, when the Super Bowl celebrated its thirtieth
anniversary with a gathering of the writers who had covered each of the
games, Rozelle was too ill to travel. He sent along a note, which read in
part, “If I was there today, just for old times sake I would turn a chair
around, grab a Coke, pull out a cigarette, and wait for your questions. If
you asked me a tough one, I would take a minute to light the cigarette
so I could buy some time. I think you were on to my trick.”
In 1996, as his health worsened, Rozelle stopped going out to
functions. His last public appearance came in August, when he was
onstage in San Diego to watch Jack Kemp accept the vice presidential
nomination at the Republican National Convention. Standing alongside
him, and shepherding him through the crowd, was another longtime
friend and occasional adversary, former union leader and Mackey v. NFL
plaintiff John Mackey.
In the fall, Rozelle spent his weekends glued to the bank of big-screen
TVs in his den, receiving a select few friends. He did witness the revival
of the Green Bay Packers, who in the free agency era would become a
synthesis of the sport's grandest virtues, the ultimate small-market team
(just 100,000 citizens in Green Bay), led by the modernistic approach of
Bill Walsh protégé Mike Holmgren, and the sharp personnel moves of
the hard-bitten, plainspoken GM Ron Wolf, who in 1992 traded a firstround pick for a little-used Atlanta backup quarterback named Brett
Favre.
Rozelle died on December 6, 1996, and the next month found the NFL
in a kind of extended mourning. At Super Bowl XXXI in New Orleans,
where the Packers beat the Patriots, both teams wore small decals, a
script reading “Pete” on the back of their helmets.
And the connection—between Rozelle's vision of a sports league, and a

world championship in America's biggest sport being won by a team
representing a city of 100,000—was not lost on Packers president Bob
Harlan.
“There are only two reasons we can exist in this market,” said Harlan,
in the days following Rozelle's death. “The first is that, back in the
1960s, Pete Rozelle convinced the NFL owners to share their profits.
Today, 84 percent of the Packers’ income comes from shared revenue.
The other factor is the salary cap. It's not a ‘hard cap,’ and we wish it
were. But it works.”
By the time the Packers celebrated their title, Paul Tagliabue had
stopped the bleeding in franchise free agency. At the 1996 annual
meetings, the league made it clear to owners that the league would
legally fight any attempted move to the Los Angeles market. With the
backlash against the league and the Browns, it was becoming apparent
that the days of cities assuming the entire financing for stadiums—
especially football stadiums that could guarantee use only ten days a
year—were largely past. New stadiums would require some combination
of public and private funding, and some clubs were hard-pressed to
pledge $100 million or more, without violating the league's rules against
taking on excessive debt. Out of that hardship would emerge the seeds of
the plan that would eventually help stop the flow of franchise moves, the
league's G-3 stadium construction program, through which the league
advanced clubs the money to pay for up to 50 percent of the cost of a
new stadium.
It would be three years before the new Cleveland Browns took the
field for their 1999 season opener against the Pittsburgh Steelers, and
while it would never be quite the same for the people of Cleveland,
Tagliabue and the league had done what they could to preserve the
unique relationship between the community and the team. The NFL
universe was once again an environment in which the most spirited
competition could return to the field of play. It would take some time to
recognize it as such, but out of the chaos of franchise free agency, a new
golden era had begun.

23

“A Different World”

I

n a comfortable, unassuming office park in the Baltimore suburb of
Timo-nium, the most celebrated quarterback in pro football history
spent his days like most Americans, working for a living.
He was usually alone in the cozy two-room office, and answered his
own phone. “Matco Electronics,” he'd say, “this is John Unitas.” He was
no mere front-door greeter or community affairs representative. Unitas
would have considered such work patronizing. As a vice president of the
small company, which manufactured circuit boards, he filled orders,
planned appointments, moved product.
And though the effects of a 1968 arm injury had left his right hand
virtually useless, Unitas simply adapted, and soldiered on stoically. He
couldn't shave or brush his teeth or zip a zipper or button a shirt, but he
started writing, eating, and answering the phone with his arthritic left
hand.
Like so many other Colts from the glory years, he had found work in
Baltimore, and stayed after his career was over, even after the
disappointment of several failed business ventures, and the
disillusionment of the Colts leaving town in 1984.
Unitas was still working in Baltimore when the Ravens began play in
1996. He bore no grudge against Art Modell, and when the owner
invited him to the games, Unitas came. He'd often stand on the sidelines,
and acknowledge the roar of the crowd when his image was flashed on
the huge video screen. The Ravens were the new home team, but
Baltimore's heart still belonged to the old Colts and Johnny Unitas.

When asked about the modern game, Unitas told the truth as he saw
it. “It's become show business—high-five, low-five, dancing on the
sidelines, slapping, you know, jumping in the stands. And television
promotes it. And they're great players—take nothing away from anybody
as far as the players are concerned. But all that's not necessary. Don't
know what to do about it. I mean that's the way it is.” Though he
disagreed with their means of expression, he was careful not to seem
resentful. “I don't blame the kids for getting the money,” he said. “It's
there to get. I mean, first time that you falter or you have a bad year,
you're out of there. The owner doesn't care—there's no loyalty lost in the
National Football League.”
Unitas had played in a period before football players became
millionaires, but even if he'd been independently wealthy, work seemed
embedded in his personality. He rose above the poverty of his youth, but
never forgot it. Upon losing to Unitas and the Colts in 1965, the Vikings’
coach Norm Van Brocklin explained the result by saying, “We should've
won, but Unitas is a guy who knows what it was to eat potato soup
seven days a week as a kid. That's what beat us.”
What was true in Unitas's day was equally true in the modern age. “If
one truism ever existed in sports,” said the Giants’ longtime GM George
Young, “it's that hungry players are better players. Sports is
socioeconomic.” At the turn of the twenty-first century, football would
become, more than ever before, a story about the tenacious children of
unemployment, poverty, and divorce fighting their way to a better life.
Unitas and many of those who remained in the game recognized the
timeless quality of the hunger of the dispossessed, that the players who
made it to the pro level were often the ones most desperate to succeed.
That presented new challenges for teams, not just in interviewing but
managing players. “You have to have the foresight nowadays to know
where the problems are coming from, and you have to avoid them,” said
Bill Par-cells, whose teams were noted for having a stronger surveillance
and security presence than almost any other team. “It is difficult because
the owners have never tried to survive in this world. This is a different
culture you're dealing with here. These kids coming out of gangs, the

streets, this is a whole different culture.”
If the culture they were coming from was different, so was the one
they were entering. For decades, of course, football players found
themselves fending off the advances of sycophants, shady businessmen,
unscrupulous agents, and would-be friends who would, as the Steelers’
Joe Gilliam vividly put it in 1973, “seem sincere and all the time they're
planning to fuck your mama and blow you up too.” In the ’90s, with the
heightened profile of players, and the remarkable amount of money they
were making, those pressures intensified and multiplied.
From 1993 to 2002, the league increased funding for its rookie
seminar and player development program fourfold to help players better
cope with the pressures. The change was equally dramatic among clubs.
In 1992, the Chiefs became the first team to hire a full-time employee in
the area of player development. A decade later, every team in the league
had at least one person on the job. Their tasks included everything from
financial advice to anger-management counseling, and reflected the
heightened stakes for the teams.
In the modern NFL, a vast majority of coaches and administrators
were white, while a vast majority of players, about 70 percent, were
black. While that led to an inevitable cultural divide, it also resulted in
an increased awareness of what it took to excel in the game. On the
field, the racial stereotypes of blacks as gifted but undisciplined athletes,
and whites as gutty, cerebral competitors often was turned on its head.
“Look, white kids are riding around in their mama's air-conditioned
SUVs, eating Twinkies,” said the longtime pro player and college coach
Bill Curry. “The African-American kids are out there busting it in the
heat, they're hungry. There are far more of these kids who come out of
tough circumstances, who live and watch their mama work three fulltime jobs trying to feed five brothers and sisters by herself with the
grandmother helping to raise them and the great-grandmother involved
too and they turn out tough, hungry, young people.”
“I was at Stanford, and that's a great place to coach and it was an
enjoyable place to recruit and you interacted with a great class of
people,” said Brian Bil-lick, the onetime Bill Walsh assistant who became
the head coach of the Ravens in 1999. “But one of the difficulties at

Stanford was, you had in large part a bunch of kids who, when it's
fourth-and-goal on the one-yard line against Notre Dame, know in the
back of their mind, ‘You know, if this doesn't work out, I'm going to be
okay anyway. I'm going to go make my money, I'm going to have my
career, I'm going to have my Stanford degree.’ And that's all well and
true, and in the bigger perspective that's the way it should be. But at that
point, I want them to have a little bit more at stake. Kids from lessadvantaged backgrounds take more of that perspective. ‘This is my way
out.’ ”
The players who arrived into the league in the ’90s entered a world in
flux. The advent of free agency and the salary cap jolted many of the
game's cherished assumptions about how teams ought to be constructed,
how much time that building could be expected to take, and how long it
might last.
The expansion teams’ quick rise was the best indicator of the radically
altered world of the modern game. In the previous expansion in 1976,
the Seattle Seahawks and Tampa Bay Buccaneers joined the NFL and
won nine games over their first two seasons. In 1995, the Carolina
Panthers and Jacksonville Jaguars joined the NFL and won thirty-five
games over their first two seasons, both advancing to their conference
championship games in 1996. The Packers’ president and GM, Ron Wolf,
who'd been there for the agonizing twenty-six straight losses at the
beginning of the Tampa Bay franchise, refused to refer to Carolina and
Jacksonville as expansion teams—“free agency teams” was the term he
used—but by any other name, their effect was equally profound. “What
they did in two years changed the whole landscape of this game forever
and ever,” Wolf said. “You don't have time now. If you're not successful,
they kick your ass out and someone else comes in, because you have to
be successful. That old adage you have to crawl before you can walk?
Well, they strutted in.”
Though history will record the beginning of free agency as 1993 and
the first year of the salary cap as 1994, the true impact of the structure
wasn't felt until a few years later, once the residual effect of earlier
seasons’ bonuses and contracts took their toll on successive years. The
rise of the Panthers and Jags showed how quickly teams could be built.
And the eventual demise of the Cowboys and 49ers, the two teams that

spent much of the ’90s vying for the title of Team of the Decade, showed
how quickly the powers could disintegrate.
Those two teams had used lengthy contracts, creative financing—in
the 49ers’ case, too creative, resulting in a fine from the league office—
and the stockpile of dominating talent they had built up in the early ’90s
to postpone the inevitable cap hit as long as possible. But in 1999, the
hit arrived. The Cowboys, who backed into the playoffs with an 8-8
record, were a shell of their former dominating selves. Months after
they'd won their third title in four seasons, wide receiver Michael Irvin
was arrested for cocaine possession. Irvin's transgression turned out to be
the most explosive in the larger story of the meltdown of America's
Team. From late 1995 to late 1996, the NFL suspended twelve players
for drug abuse, and six of them were Cowboys. In pleading not guilty to
the charge of drug possession in a Dallas courtroom, Irvin displayed an
astounding amount of hubris—he showed up to his grand jury hearing in
a full-length mink coat—and opened the door for a series of other sordid
allegations. Through that and other trials came tales of the exploits of
many of the Cowboys’ players, who had rented a large mansion— “the
White House,” they called it—to entertain women. “We've got a little
place over here where we're running some whores in and out, trying to
be responsible, and we're criticized for that, too,” complained a vexed
Nate Newton. Players conducting extramarital affairs were nothing new
(Jim Brown wrote about a similar residence, called “Headquarters,” used
by some of the Browns in the ’60s), but widespread coverage of the
event was, and further intensified the storm of coverage surrounding the
club.
The 1999 season was just a stop on the way down to the first of three
consecutive 5-11 seasons in 2000. By 2001, the Cowboys were a
shambles, devoting more than one third of their payroll to “dead
money,” bonuses paid to players who were no longer with the team. The
stockpile of draft choices the team built in the early ’90s was gone, as
was the scouting and coaching acumen of Jimmy Johnson.
And the 49ers, after a sixteen-season run in which they averaged more
than twelve wins per year, and never won fewer than ten, hit a salary
cap wall in 1999, dropping to 4-12. Because of choices they'd made in
the mid-’90s, neither team was competitive at the end of the decade. But

Dallas had added three Super Bowl trophies and San Francisco one, and
both clubs felt the hardware justified the later hardships.
With the self-destruction of the great Cowboys power and the end of
the 49ers’ great run, the notion of the dynasty in pro football was all but
over. Green Bay advanced to consecutive Super Bowls in the 1996 and
1997 seasons, winning one, before retreating later in the decade. Denver
won back-to-back titles in 1997 and 1998, after which John Elway
retired and the Broncos didn't win a playoff game for the next five years.
For the teams that got close but didn't win the Super Bowl—Buffalo,
Kansas City, Pittsburgh, and Philadelphia most prominent among them—
the fallout was all the more painful. Buffalo's dominating team wouldn't
return to the Super Bowl after their fourth straight loss following the
1993 season, and would be forever marked—however unfairly—by their
failure rather than their accomplishment. After the third Super Bowl
loss, a writer saw Bills GM Bill Polian and asked if he felt depressed.
“Try wounded beyond recognition,” said Polian.
At first glance, it seemed as though the new economic system would
make the draft less important, since there would be another method to
acquire premium players. But when teams became disillusioned with the
performance of their high-priced acquisitions, they came to realize that
good drafts were still crucial. Not only did a draft bust hurt a club's
talent level the year he arrived, but the contract he signed could impair
a team's ability to sign other good players for years to come.
In this new environment, it was logical that many of the people who'd
risen through the football ranks in personnel departments—Carl
Peterson in Kansas City, Ron Wolf in Green Bay, Bobby Beathard in San
Diego, Charley Armey in St. Louis—found themselves running not just
scouting departments but entire teams. Few were better at it than Polian,
the ginger-haired, hot-tempered former scout who'd built the Bills’
dominant early-’90s team, then went to Carolina and turned the
expansion Panthers into a championship contender in two years. After
clashing with Panthers owner Jerry Richardson in the 1997 season,
Polian left to take the job as president and general manager of the
Indianapolis Colts, who after the brief illusory hopes of their 1995 trip to

the AFC championship game had plummeted to a 3-13 season by 1997.
Polian's first big decision would be a crucial one, typifying the high
stakes of the modern game: Indianapolis owned the first pick in the 1998
draft and would get to choose between two blue-chip quarterbacks.
Tennessee's Peyton Manning, the son of longtime pro Archie, was a
coach's player, a beast in the film room whose techniques were advanced
and whose makeup seemed designed with the job of a pro quarterback in
mind. Manning had been so well known for so long that some felt he'd
been overrated, due to his family heritage and his prominent position as
a four-year starter for the Vols. Washington State's rangy Ryan Leaf, who
had the prototypical physique for pro pocket passer, was thought by
most scouts to be slightly less polished but with a significantly higher
upside.
Had they gone only on the game scouting of the previous fall, the
Colts likely would have selected Leaf. In the months leading up to the
draft, Polian spent roughly 500 hours analyzing the comparative
strengths of the two quarterbacks. He and his staff watched each of
Manning's 1,505 college passes and each of Leaf ’s 880 throws, viewing
the 1997 passes twice over again. And from that epic instance of
overanalysis—as well as the team's personal interviews, psychological
and intelligence testing, and comprehensive physical exams— came a
deeper level of understanding and, ultimately, the right choice.
“From a pure scouting standpoint, you would have taken Leaf in a
heartbeat,” said Polian. “Now, as it turns out, when you really got into
analysis, even the physical, there were perceptions about Manning that
were untrue. There were perceptions about Leaf that were untrue, but
your eye sees what it sees and your ear hears what it hears, so scouts
came back and said, ‘Manning has a weak arm.’ When you analyzed
every pass they threw for the years that they were in school, that wasn't
true. But no scout has the ability to do that. You can only do that in the
off-season when you can put together all the film. I remember remarking
to [Colts offensive coordinator] Tom Moore how astounded I was by the
fact that Peyton threw a heavier ball with many more revolutions per
second than Leaf. Even the physical part of it, the initial reports were
wrong and the conventional wisdom and hype was one hundred percent
wrong.”

Indianapolis chose Manning, who started from the first game of his
rookie season, winning Rookie of the Year honors. A year later, Polian's
trade of Marshall Faulk to St. Louis for the draft pick that became
Edgerrin James, allowed him to combine the talent of James, Manning,
and wide receiver Marvin Harrison in the same explosive package. Indy
went to the playoffs in 1999 and under Polian developed the look of a
perennial contender. When the Bucs fired Tony Dungy after a playoff
loss in 2001, Polian quickly hired him to help add stability and a solid
defense to one of the most dangerous offenses in the league.
Leaf, taken with the second pick by the San Diego Chargers and signed
to a five-year contract valued at $31.25 million, proved moody and
petulant. He suffered three abysmal seasons in San Diego, before the
Chargers swallowed the salary cap hit by releasing him in 2001. He was
out of pro football a year later. But the team was still suffering the
effects of the Leaf draft in 2002, when Schottenheimer took over as San
Diego's head coach.
While the stakes with other picks weren't as high, divining who would
succeed in professional football remained a central and complicated task
with every selection. In Schottenheimer's mind, the great unknown was
how each player would respond to those pressures. “If someone could
provide some kind of reliable indicator of how young men would deal
with these three fac-tors—1) More adoration and recognition than
they've ever been used to receiving before, 2) More unsupervised time
than they've ever had in their lives, and 3) More money than they've
ever had in their life—if you could find a psychological test that could
give you a reliable sense of how people would respond to those three
factors, you could probably eliminate about 75 percent of the mistakes
in the draft.”
The rise of player development led some coaches to feel that any
player could be molded into a solid citizen and a conscientious football
player. But experience taught coaches differently. “They usually don't
change very much once they get here,” said Tony Dungy. What was
required to excel was an allencompassing commitment to the game, and
in virtually every case, a pro player who succeeded did so by dedicating
himself to the profession.
“You can't live soft and fight hard,” said the All-Pro defensive tackle

Warren Sapp, whose gift of hyperbole often obscured a savage work
ethic and deep-seated respect for the game. “You have to program
yourself. It doesn't just happen; it ain't a switch that you turn on and
turn off as you walk through the door of the complex. I mean, I live,
read, eat, sleep, shit football. That's me. That's what I do. And if you
don't do that, then this game is gonna eat you up and devour you.”
In July 1999, Paul Tagliabue, making his annual tour of selected NFL
training camps, stopped at the St. Louis Rams’ camp in Macomb, Illinois.
Addressing the players after practice, he gave his boilerplate speech.
“You've got the greatest, most popular league in the world,” he told the
assembled players. “You've got a phenomenal opportunity. There's
tremendous competitive balance. No matter where you were last year,
you can win it this year. If you win it, you'll be on top of the world.
Make sure you don't screw it up by doing something dumb off the field,
or by letting down on the field.”
The idea of winning it all seemed slightly outlandish to the Rams, the
decade's losingest franchise, and who'd gone 4-12 in 1998. At the
beginning of the third season of Dick Vermeil's second go-round in
professional coaching, many were convinced that the Rams’ hiring of
Vermeil had been a mistake. Vermeil's family-type atmosphere had been
unable to rescue the dysfunctional slide of troubled running back
Lawrence Phillips, and his inability to mold quarterback Tony Banks into
a more mature quarterback (he'd neglected off-season workouts in favor
of basketball) seemed likely to spell his doom.
Though the Rams had done little to merit the sellout crowds that
greeted them at the TWA Dome in their first years there, they looked
outstanding in early preseason action. They'd acquired versatile running
back Marshall Faulk in a draft day trade, grabbed wideout Torry Holt in
the draft, and signed quarterback Trent Green, a St. Louis native, in free
agency. Hopes were high in the preseason, where Green connected on
twenty-eight of his first thirty-two attempts, until a late hit by Chargers
safety Rodney Harrison demolished Green's left knee and knocked him
out for the season. Vermeil, weeping over the injury to Green, vowed
that his team would soldier on, “and we'll play good football with Kurt

Warner.” But the mood of any team that loses a starting quarterback in
the preseason is dour, and many thought the Rams had lost their chance
to make a dramatic improvement.
“I remember talking to Dick Vermeil in the season opener,” said Brian
Bil-lick, then coaching his first game as the head coach of the Baltimore
Ravens. “And he was talking about hoping that this Arena League
quarterback they had could hang in long enough for them to get Paul
Justin in and schooled in the offense. I mean, no one had any idea.”
Green's backup, a journeyman quarterback from Northern Iowa named
Kurt Warner, had charted an improbable course toward an NFL job.
After a middling college career, he'd signed as a free agent and been
released by the Packers in 1994 (winding up back in Cedar Falls,
working out during the day, stocking shelves at a Hy-Vee grocery store
by night), spent three years with the Arena League's Iowa Barnstormers,
playing well but earning little interest from NFL teams, before playing in
the World League of American Football and finally latching on as the
number three quarterback for the Rams in 1998. Going into the 1999
season, one scouting report said of Warner: “A 2-year journeyman type
… has good size and arm strength … shows good touch on short to
intermediate … has some trouble reading coverages … will force some
balls … will make a lot of mistakes.”
Instead, from his first start, Warner proved to be the best quarterback
in the league. He completed 325 of 499 passes (65.1 percent) for 4,353
yards, 41 touchdowns, just 13 interceptions, and a 109.2 quarterback
rating, en route to the league's MVP award. “He's in a zone, and I've
never been around anybody who's this hot,” said Vermeil late in the
season. “Georgia Frontiere believes in astrology; maybe that's the only
way to explain it.” The scouting report on Warner turned out to be
spectacularly wrong. The Rams, 4-12 in 1998, ripped through the first
six games without a loss, and posted a 13-3 record en route to the
number one seed in the NFC.
After two home wins in the playoffs, St. Louis went to the Super Bowl,
where they outlasted Tennessee in a 23–16 game that ended with the
Titans’ wideout Kevin Dyson tackled on the St. Louis one-yard line. In
the space of four months, the least successful team of the decade had
been transformed into the best team in pro football, led by a quarterback

and league MVP who'd been considered a career backup at best.
Warner's success was more proof of the complexity of identifying
talent at pro football's most difficult position. “Most new quarterbacks
don't get the opportunity unless they're a first round pick or a high draft
choice,” said Vermeil. “They sit and watch somebody else do it, and they
maybe never get the chance. Certainly Kurt Warner went beyond my
expectations, but I think first off we gave him the opportunity and the
other thing we gave him is the belief he could do it. And then we backed
him. I think if a kid really knows you believe in him, it gives him an
opportunity to believe in himself.”
Though Warner would seem to have little in common with the
African-Americans who were dominating the game, one theme
resonated. Even for the country kid in Cedar Falls, the game was a way
out of his circumstances and toward a measure of self-esteem: “Sports
were my refuge, my social life, and for a long time my salvation,” he
wrote in his autobiography. “Part of the reason I excelled is because I
was blessed with athletic ability, but the biggest secrets of my success
were the obvious ones: I worked my butt off, and I cared more about
being the best than anyone else I knew.”
By the beginning of the twenty-first century the chasm between those
on the field and the rest of the football universe was widening.
“The simple fact is, when you step across the line you're in a different
world,” said Will Shields, the Chiefs’ Pro Bowl guard. “Basically, we're
gladiators that play on Sunday, we're guys that, they want you to be the
nicest and sweetest people off the field, and yet on Sunday, go out and
try to basically rip somebody's head off, play in and play out. And so to
balance that, you can see it could be a difficult thing to do. But I've been
doing it so long that it's become a habit.”
The margin for error for players had decreased, and the level of
criticism, through blanket coverage in the traditional media, as well as
the opinion-heavy forum of talk radio and the Internet, had increased
exponentially.
And so the belief that only those who played football could truly
understand it, flowed in concentric circles outward from the heart of the
action, even on the field. The Washington Redskins’ powerful offensive

line of the ’80s, the Hogs, made running back John Riggins an honorary
member. But when quarterback Joe Theismann asked for membership,
he was denied. Nor were quarterbacks beyond petulant dismissals of
their own. Apprised of a quote by kicker Mike Vanderjagt alleging that
the Colts of 2002 lacked fire, Peyton Manning dismissed the comments
as the ravings of an “idiot kicker.”

When the Packers’ coach, Mike Sherman, approached Warren Sapp
after Sapp's legal but merciless blindside hit on Chad Clifton, which
ended Clifton's season in 2002, Sapp's first response to Sherman was
“Fuck you!” When the beef continued, Sapp repeatedly exhorted
Sherman, “Put a jersey on!”
And off the field, proximity to the game was still important. After a
grilling from the media following a New Orleans Saints loss in 1996,
coach Jim Mora became fed up at the second-guessing of another
reporter, and interjected, “You don't know when it's good or bad. You
really don't know. You guys don't look at the film, you don't know what
happened. You really don't know. Yo u think you know, but you don't
know. And—you—never—will.”
When one is tested as persistently and judged as relentlessly as a
professional football player—whose every assignment is part of a
coordinated, interconnected thrust, each one involving a form of handto-hand physical combat—little is more maddening than an outsider
blithely critiquing a performance. And the complexity of the modern
game made any snap judgment risky.
“You know, people ask me right after the game, ‘What happened on
that play?’ ” said Bill Polian, “and I can't honestly tell them. I know the
playbook, but I have to go through the film the next day, then find out
from the coaches what the defensive call was, then talk to one or two of
the players and ask them what they remember from the play—‘Who did
you think you were covering?’ ‘Who did you think had this guy?’—and
then, after all that, I might be able to figure out what went wrong. And
even then, I'm not going to publicly say who was responsible.”
Thus one had the great conundrum of pro football's popularity: fans,
without access to the team's playbook, scouting reports, game plans, and
game films, aren't really given the tools to perfectly understand their

team's actions and responses. Faced with this tremendous reservoir of
insularity, there was little for the public or the media to do. The game's
inherent structure resisted transparency. Football was surely the only
sport where a longtime serious fan—one who knew the players by
number and sight, had followed the philosophy of the coaching staff,
and understood the talents of its players—could be placed in his favorite
team's locker room at halftime yet still have virtually no idea what the
players and coaches were discussing. Or as David Plotz put it in an essay
on football in The New Republic, “Baseball fans think their sport is
complex because they can understand it. Football fans know their sport
is complex because they can't.”
In the fortunes of the Baltimore Ravens in 2000, one could find many of
the realities of the modern era of football brought into sharp relief.
While the city had welcomed the Ravens in 1996, it did not instantly
embrace them. On December 14, 1997, for the final game at Memorial
Stadium, the Ravens invited seventy former Colts greats, who were
dressed in vintage jerseys and introduced throughout the Ravens’ 21–19
win over Tennessee. After the game, Unitas led his teammates out for
one more play. He took the snap and handed off to Tom Matte, who
gave the ball to Lenny Moore, who ran it in for a touchdown.
The following year, in the clumsily named PSI. Net Stadium (the title
sponsor would soon go out of business in the dot-com bust), the Ravens
hosted the Indianapolis Colts. Ted Patterson, the author of the memoir
Football in Baltimore, noted the unsettling circumstances: “It was bizarre
seeing the familiar blue-and-white-clad, horseshoe-helmeted Colts as the
enemy in the town that had idolized and loved them with such passion;
Johnny Unitas, the soul of the Baltimore Colts, stood on the sidelines
and rooted against them like all the other Baltimore fans. And the former
Cleveland Browns, now the Baltimore Ravens, were being cheered, while
their owner, Art Modell, was still reviled in Cleveland.”
In the late ’90s, the league again found itself battling the public
perception that many of its players were out of control. O. J. Simpson's
celebrated murder case had put the subject of football players’ behavior
back in the news, and several other incidents intensified the scrutiny,

from Irvin's drug bust to Lawrence Phillips's assault and battery charge
to more serious charges: the Seahawks’ Brian Blades was charged with
murder in 1995, though a judge threw out his manslaughter conviction.
The Panthers’ Rae Carruth was charged with murdering (and later
convicted of a lesser charge of conspiring to murder) the mother of his
unborn child in 1999. Cases like these not only besmirched the game,
but fed the belief that football players were more violent because they
played a violent game.
It was a problem the league had seen growing for years. In 1998’s Pros
and Cons: The Criminals Who Play in the NFL, investigative reporters Jeff
Benedict and Don Yaeger argued that one in five active players had
committed a major crime. Though the league took issue with Benedict
and Yaeger's numbers, arguing that the incidence of incarceration was
less than that of a similarly aged group of men in the general public, the
public perception was becoming clear.
The Carruth charges were a hot topic in January 2000, when
Tagliabue, in his annual press conference two days prior to the Super
Bowl, remarked, “We can't predict when players might snap, and
besides, most players are really good guys.” Two nights later, Ray Lewis
—the first draft choice in the history of the Baltimore Ravens—would
become involved in the sport's next crime drama.
Lewis was exactly the sort of player that Bill Curry had described—
raised on the hard streets of Lakeland, Florida, with an absent father, a
mother who worked three jobs, and the responsibility of taking care of
his four younger siblings. He had attended the University of Miami,
where his closest friend, roommate Marlin Barnes, was murdered. Two
other close friends had died in the ’90s, and Lewis had tattoos honoring
each.
Upon arriving in the NFL, represented by the pugnacious agent Drew
Rosenhaus, Lewis immediately became one of the best young players in
the game, leading the league in tackles in two of his first four seasons.
Off the field, there was much about Lewis's life to trouble his team and
mainstream fans alike. The team had been growing increasingly nervous
about his friendships.
On Super Bowl night, in a parking lot outside the Atlanta nightclub

Cobalt, Lewis and two friends were involved in an altercation with two
other men who were knifed to death. Lewis spent the off-season facing a
double-murder charge, before agreeing to testify for the prosecution in
exchange for a reduced charge of obstruction of justice (he'd been
uncooperative and sarcastic in his early interviews with police). For his
involvement in the incident and the behavior afterward, he was fined a
record sum of $250,000 by Tagliabue, but allowed to return to action in
the 2000 season.
With that as the backdrop, the team's defense played with a controlled
fury worthy of the best defensive teams in the NFL. Their potent two-gap
defensive scheme was anchored by tackle Tony Siragusa and by a
punishing secondary, while the passionate, driven Lewis roamed the
field in the best tradition of Butkus and Lanier. En route to winning the
league's Defensive Player of the Year award, Lewis stayed largely silent
during the season, though he did sound off in an as-told-to ESPN The
Magazine cover story, in which he criticized Tagliabue for the stiff fine.
From the day Lewis was charged, his cause and character were
defended by Ravens head coach Brian Billick. Tall, articulate, and selfassured, Billick was the sort of obviously intelligent man whose manner
struck some people as too self-assured. The all-conference tight end from
Brigham Young had failed to stick in tryouts with the 49ers and
Cowboys before turning to coaching (and serving for two seasons in the
publicity department for Walsh's 49ers). After a decade in the college
coaching ranks, he returned to the pros for good for Dennis Greeen in
Minnesota, and was perhaps the man most responsible for the
widespread rush in the ’90s to hands-on computer use by coaching staffs.
For all his mastery of the game's technical details, Billick's hidden
strength was his undersstanding of the modern athlete, and he was the
right man to lead the Ravens through the accusations and distractions of
the 2000 season, when—owing largely to outrage over Lewis's behavior
and the lingering resentment of Modell—the Ravens would be one of the
most widely disliked teams to compete in the Super Bowl. The team's
offense atrophied during the season, and quarterback Tony Banks was
benched in favor of veteran backup Trent Dilfer. Billick had the good
sense to adapt his own pass-first style to the talents of the team, and the
Ravens ground out a series of close wins, including two road victories,

the second in the playoffs, over division rival Tennessee.
In the buildup to the Super Bowl, Billick was combative and
standoffish, earning a share of criticism but deflecting some of the harsh
glare from the media's scrutiny of Lewis. The linebacker still faced up to
the inevitable grilling on Media Day five days before the game. His lack
of contrition only raised the heat. “I'm not here to please you,” Lewis
told the press.“If I'm an average Joe, none of you all are here. Now that's
how really simple it is.”
The Super Bowl featured another dominant performance from the
Ravens’ defense, and Lewis would be named MVP. But his most
memorable moment came during the pregame introductions. After a
year of personal turmoil, Lewis emerged from the tunnel of Raymond
James Stadium like a rap star. He came on the field with a kind of
staccato, gesticulating tribal dance, standing on his tiptoes, thrusting his
hips, preening and high-stepping in a strutting, controlled rage, while
cheers and boos washed over him like a baptism for his year in the
wilderness. For many traditional sports fans, the gesture was not merely
disquieting but offensive.
Yet no less of an expert than Jim Brown—no fan of onfield histrionics
— gave him his seal of approval. “I like Ray Lewis because he's the
ultimate team player,” said Brown. “He's the ultimate example of a man
that will study tremendously, and his being a student of the game comes
out more than his physical way because in his pass defense he knows
where to go. And he inspires the rest of his team.”
The Ravens trounced the Giants, 34–7, completing Lewis's astonishing
journey from facing a double-murder charge the weekend of one Super
Bowl to being named MVP of the next one. But it was Trent Dilfer, not
Lewis, who was asked to do the “I'm going to Disney World” spot that
traditionally went to the game's MVP. And it was five other Ravens
defenders, but not Lewis, who were featured on the cover of the
following season's NFL Record and Fact Book. “After the episode in
Atlanta,” said NFL spokesman Greg Aiello, “we were just going to stay
away from him.”
The following summer, when Billick agreed to let an NFL Films crew
gain unprecedented access to the Ravens’ camp, for an HBO series called

Hard Knocks, it gave further insight into the life of a football player.
Lewis emerged as a complex character, both raffish in nature and, true
to Jim Brown's words, dedicated to the game.
By the 2003 season, Lewis had become one of the most visible players
in the league, a staple of NFL Films highlight packages, a constant
presence in ads for EA Sports video games, and when Reebok wanted to
use Lewis in an NFL apparel ad, the league consented. In the spring of
2001, he had addressed a rapt audience of players at the rookie seminar,
and told them to choose their friends wisely.
More than one commentator remarked upon the large moral gap
between Baltimore's previous football hero, Unitas, and its new one, Ray
Lewis. But the easy generalizations shed little light. And it was
ultimately left to Jim Brown to provide a sense of perspective. Asked
whether the modern players could measure up to the greats of his era,
he said, “I recognize that the game has to evolve, and I don't necessarily
disagree with that. My car is a ’69 Mercedes 280 SC—it's a classic car,
and it's great for what it is. But it can't compare to all the technical
things that you'll find in a 2000 car. And the kids don't want no classics.
So I like the quality of the game in my day, but I recognize the brilliance
of the athletes today. And I respect them.”
What emerged from the Super Bowls following the 1999 and 2000
seasons was not just a fluctuating, turbulent new order in the
competitive balance of the league, but something else, not quite
apposite, about the match-ups.
Had the Rams and Titans stayed in Los Angeles and Houston, the two
teams would have brought a history of more than ninety years in their
respective cities into the game. Instead the Rams had been in St. Louis
for just five seasons, and the itinerant Titans (who played in Memphis in
1997) had been playing home games in Nashville for just two seasons. It
was an electrifying football game, but for longtime fans it lacked a
measure of drama, because the civic identification with both teams was
still in its infancy.
“Can you imagine if someone had just been in a coma for three years,
and just came out of it?” said Ron Wolf in 2000.“Hey let's watch the

Super Bowl— it's the St. Louis Rams against someone called the
Tennessee Titans? You'd think you were in a foreign country. You'd think
it was soccer or something.”
The following year was equally jarring. It featured New York and
Baltimore were vying for a title again, just as the cities had in the
watershed 1958 title game. But Super Bowl XXXV didn't evoke the
Giants-Colts classic (because the Ravens weren't the Colts), nor did it
echo the storied showdowns between the Giants and the Browns
(because Art Modell notwithstanding, the Ravens weren't the Browns,
either).
In his classic study of spectator sports, Sports Illusion, Sports Reality, the
writer Leonard Koppett identified seven key elements that distinguished
spectator sports from other forms of entertainment. The second was
continuity (“In sports, the relationship to earlier events is automatic,
almost always present in the forefront of consciousness, and part of the
melodrama that is unfolding); the fourth was coherence (for the sports
fan, “everything is orderly and definite … sports offer an island of
stability in a confusing, shifting cosmos”). But the ’90s had proved just
how fragile these concepts of continuity and coherence could be. So in
Baltimore, St. Louis, and Cleveland, fans had football teams again. But it
wasn't, couldn't ever be, quite the same.

24

Man at the Top

N

early sixty years after the Los Angeles Rams opened their first
season in California, the Los Angeles Coliseum stood in stately
desolation, from every angle a reminder of a time gone by.
One could walk around the vast expanse of the Coliseum and survey
the neglected grandeur of the massive cement bowl, surrounded by
chain link fencing topped with barbed wire, its vast exterior walls
trimmed in the faded pastels of the 1984 Olympic Games. Inside, the
Coliseum still possessed its old charm, and at the peristyle end of the
stadium, on the Coliseum pillars, aged in bronze, was the Coliseum's
Wall of Champions. The entry for Dan Reeves read:
OWNER AND PRESIDENT

LOS ANGELES RAMS, 1941–1971

PIONEERED PROFESSIONAL SPORTS
IN THE WEST

LOYALTY, INTEGRITY AND HUMANITY
CAME WITH HIM

As pro football rode triumphantly into the twenty-first century, the
same market that summoned Reeves and helped spark the first signs of
postwar growth stood empty once again. And the game as Reeves
experienced it—the tidy profits, the small staffs, the collegial
competition among sportsman owners, and the sense of light, effortless
spectacle—was virtually gone. The curious case of the Los Angeles
market underscored, better than anything, how the business of football

had changed.
Few expected the NFL's absence from the city to last so long. Each of
the other major leagues had two franchises in the Los Angeles area, and
as soon as the Raiders and Rams vacated the city, the NFL announced its
intention to replace them with at least one franchise. In 1999, even as
the Raiders were (again) suing the league, alleging that the NFL had
sabotaged a favorable stadium deal in Hollywood Park that would have
kept them in the Los Angeles area, the NFL awarded a provisional thirtysecond franchise to the market, giving the city six months to secure
financing for improvements to the Coliseum.
The prospect was irresistible: a refurbished Coliseum serving as the
jewel of a renovated Exposition Park that already included broad sweeps
of manicured lawns and cultural magnets, like the Natural History
Museum of Los Angeles, the California African American Museum, and
the California Science Center. But as the deadline neared, it became
apparent that no real money was forthcoming. California was fighting a
deepening financial crisis, and neither the city of Los Angeles nor the
state of California would put forth public funds for stadium
improvements. But by 1999, the National Football League was long past
giving away franchises. While politicians charged the NFL with seeking
“corporate welfare,” Houston businessman Robert McNair had lined up
funding for a retractable roof stadium in Houston. On October 6, three
weeks after the deadline for L.A. had expired, the NFL granted its thirtysecond franchise to McNair, and the Houston Texans were born, at a
price of $700 million. Just a decade earlier, franchises were selling for a
tenth as much.
Awarding the thirty-second franchise to Houston left Los Angeles out
in the cold. It also foreshadowed a potentially epic fight in the future. In
San Diego, Minneapolis, Indianapolis, and New Orleans, discussions of
new stadiums for existing NFL teams all carried the implicit weight of
the empty Los Angeles market. With no expansion planned in the
foreseeable future, there was just one move left.
As media outlets and delivery systems multiplied in the late ’90s, ratings
for virtually all sports—in fact all network entertainment—dipped

significantly. Ye t pro football's numbers remained strong. As cable
television and the Internet divided America into hundreds of narrowly
defined discrete audiences, the league's primacy became even more
pronounced. This led, in 1998, to another staggering television contract,
an eight-year, $18.1 billion deal that would by 2005 generate $84
million per year for each club. After the deal was announced, Fox's
David Hill proclaimed, “The NFL represents the only firm ground in an
increasingly scary swamp. It is the one safe bet, the one thing in the
network business that makes sense.”
In the first decade of his tenure, Paul Tagliabue had smartly tended to
that firm and fertile ground. In addition to the best labor relations
agreement in pro sports, Tagliabue had secured the toughest drug- and
steroids-testing programs among the leagues, and had ushered in an era
of widespread revenue growth, all while keeping faith with the league's
organizing principles of competitive balance. The league's successes were
all the more dramatic for the context in which they occurred. Major
League Baseball emerged from its World Series–killing 1994 work
stoppage with its financial model more skewed than ever before, and in
the following years, both the NBA and NHL lost portions of their seasons
due to labor unrest.
Meanwhile, the NFL was able to keep much of the unseemly public
squabbling over money out of the news, while the league's ancillary
business grew markedly. This was thanks in part to the business
guidance of president Neil Austrian, the investment banker who served
from 1991 to 1999 as the league's chief financial officer. Austrian's
late-’80s brainstorm of NFL Sunday Ticket— which showed out-of-market
games at a premium price to satellite dish owners—finally launched in
1995 and grew quickly, generating additional revenue from fans who
wanted a wider choice of games than that offered by their local TV
affiliates. The same year, the NFL was the first to establish an Internet
presence, with NFL.com, which would rapidly grow into one of the most
popular Web addresses in sport. The league, already a leading licenser of
console system video game sports simulations (EA Sports's John Madden
NFL Football sold over 30 million units by 2004), would later become the
first league to embrace fantasy sports (a crucial element in helping
football pass baseball as the most popular fantasy sport), and throughout

the decade remained the most popular marketer of licensed sports
apparel.
Among the most important, but least understood, of the NFL's new
initiatives was the league's G-3 stadium financing program, formalized in
1999, which helped stop the flow of franchise free agency and ushered
in an era of widespread growth of new, revenue-rich stadiums. Through
the G-3 program, the league could advance member clubs up to 50
percent (or $150 million) of the amount the club had committed as a
private contribution to any public-private stadium projects.
On the strength of the league's heightened business profile and the
twenty new stadiums built or refurbished since 1993, the NFL's revenues
had doubled in the space of five years, to nearly $5 billion in 2002. But
success has many parents, and if Paul Tagliabue no longer had to
constantly cope with crises, his challenge in the twenty-first century
would be to maintain the fragile equilibrium in which the league
enjoyed its prosperity. That would prove, in its own way, as much of a
challenge as the often traumatic previous decade had been.
Despite his largely successful record, Tagliabue began the second
decade of his commissionership as still a largely unknown quantity to
the general public, less publicized than NBA honcho David Stern, less
demonized than Major League Baseball commissioner Bud Selig. Pete
Rozelle's successor seemed destined to become one of those people
whose public persona was largely at odds with the real person.
He was universally respected around the office, and his closest
lieutenants—executive vice presidents Harold Henderson, Joe Browne,
Jeff Pash, and Roger Goodell, as well as vice president of
communications Greg Aiello— treated him with affectionate deference.
They spoke of his essential decency, his indifference to the trappings of
power, his even-handed leadership. They'd long ago stopped trying to
match his fierce work rate and omnivorous reading habits. As Joe
Browne told staffers, “When Paul asks you if you've read something in
the Times, just nod your head yes, then go back to your office and find
it.” The owners respected him enough that by 2004 his annual
compensation package was $8.5 million.
Publicly, though, Tagliabue still didn't seem to connect, and his

lawyer's background often got the best of him. In interviews, he gave
little insight to his own feelings, and seemed impatient with reporters
who were less informed than he, which was to say virtually all reporters.
In press conferences, he often spoke in platitudes, and could seem either
arch or hopelessly square by turns, coming off as peevishly
argumentative when fielding tough questions.
Yet Tagliabue had proven himself to the caretakers of the game, and
many of those old-guard, football-first owners who'd most opposed his
election in 1989 were his biggest supporters a decade later. They had
learned that Tagli-abue understood the eternal verities, and if he was
less than adept at dazzling the press, that was a trade-off with which
they were gladly willing to live. The key agreements that solidified the
league's prosperity in the ’90s—from the 210-page collective bargaining
agreement to the complex G-3 stadium plan to the excellent drug-testing
program—were achieved during long hours of meetings, involving all
manner of lawyers, bankers, scientists, and financial analysts, and
Tagliabue's special genius was the ability to keep those meetings from
completely losing sight of the game as the core concern.
Surveying the state of the league at the end of 2001, Tagliabue was
able to articulate a manifesto that was, in the best sense, an extension of
the efforts of Bell and Rozelle before him.
“If you understand that you want to have every team in the league
with an opportunity to win, then you have to get the players to buy into
a system which has a lot of elements of sharing in it,” he said. “That
includes a salary cap. But you can't get the players to accept that unless
you have a mirror image on the ownership side.
“Now, if you allow the revenue side of the structure to change in
fundamental ways, then the whole structure will change in fundamental
ways, including what the players are prepared to accept. If you end up
having have-nots and haves when it comes to revenue, you end up
having have-nots and haves when it comes to talent. And then you have
a league with a product that is less attractive, and you've started a
downward spiral. At this point, I know that as well as I know my family
tree.”

The year that would best demonstrate Tagliabue's leadership was 2001.
It began with the potentially divisive issue of realignment, and the
league's move from a six- to eight-division setup with the addition of the
thirty-second franchise, the Houston Texans, in 2002. The universe of
thirty-two clubs had been part of Rozelle's vision at least as far back as
the summer of 1969, when in an interview with Quarterback magazine,
he said, “If the economics of professional football were such that it
would be feasible, the ideal number [of teams] would be 32. Then we
could have two conferences, 16 teams in each, broken down into four
four-team divisions.”
But having the teams was one matter, and deciding which divisional
alignments they'd go in was something else entirely. The issue provided
a microcosm of the commissioner's job, of balancing the competing
interests of thirty-two different owners with the game's tradition and the
need for some kind of change. It had been one of Rozelle's most
intractable problems in 1970, when sixty-five hours of talks at league
meetings still yielded no consensus on the NFC's alignment, prompting
Rozelle to call on Thelma Elkjer to draw one of five plans out of an
office flower vase.
But much debate was blunted in the new round by Tagliabue's
successful push to pool all teams’ visiting revenues and divide them
equally, thus eliminating those variables. After months of public
speculation, the actual discussion went easily and the realignment plan
passed unanimously. With few exceptions, teams that had been grouped
together for decades remained so.
The new scheduling formula that accompanied the realignment was
equally well conceived, guaranteeing teams fourteen common games
with opponents within their division, and eliminating the lopsided
scheduling advantage offered to fifth-place teams in previous seasons.
Just weeks later, in mid-June, Tagliabue and Gene Upshaw announced
that the league and NFL Players Association had reached a tentative
agreement on extending the collective bargaining agreement through
2007, while mitigating one of the problems in the old agreement, the
escalating minimum salary requirements based on seniority that were
costing many veterans jobs.
The first weekend of the 2001 season culminated with Denver

christening its new stadium with a 23–10 win over the Giants on
Monday night, September 10. The following morning, at about 6:30
a.m., the Giants’ charter from Denver arrived at Newark Airport. The
team boarded a bus right on the tarmac, not far from where United
Airlines Flight 93 was preparing for its 8:42 departure to San Francisco.

At the league office that morning, Tagliabue was on a conference call
with executives of the United Way, discussing the league's charity
partnership, as the planes ripped into the World Trade Center. In the
wake of the third attack, on the Pentagon near the nation's capital, the
conference call was cut short and Tagliabue quickly took stock of the
league office, where two employees would lose spouses in the attacks.
While many staffers spent the afternoon praying at St. Patrick's
Cathedral a block away from the league office, Tagli-abue was calling
around to the extended NFL family that was closest to the at-tacks—
Upshaw at the NFLPA headquarters in D.C., as well as the staffs of the
Giants, Jets, and Redskins.
In the immediate aftermath of the attacks, there was a pronounced
division of opinion within the world of sport, which would go
unresolved for the next forty-eight hours. On one side, many (especially
those who were physically close to the attacks) found the idea of playing
games unconscionable. At Giants Stadium, the parking lot was being
used as a staging area for the behemoth excavation equipment needed
for the Ground Zero rescue effort. But there was a strong minority on the
other side of the issue, who felt that canceling games would be an act of
capitulation, a sign to terrorists that their acts had been successful. The
Giants’ player rep Jason Sehorn called Giants GM Ernie Accorsi on
Wednesday and explained that, while the players weren't going to issue a
public statement, they were unified in their opposition to games that
weekend. “We're not playing,” said Sehorn.
While many were inevitably looking back at Rozelle's decision to play
games two days after John F. Kennedy's assassination in 1963, Tagliabue
understood the larger implications. “This is not the Kennedy
assassination,” he told a conference call of owners. “This is not Pearl
Harbor. It's worse.”
His decision, written out in his home in the early morning hours
Thursday and sent to the clubs that morning, was decisive, eloquent, and

respectful: “This week we have witnessed despicable acts. Within our
NFL family, loved ones are missing. Such events try our hearts and souls.
These events and experiences will deeply affect all of us—not just for
now but for years, lifetimes, generations. As a nation and as individuals,
we will respond in many ways on many fronts. Supporting, respecting,
grieving, learning, becoming closer, more resolute, stronger. We will
carry on—not move on and forget—but carry on…. We will not play
NFL games this weekend.”
The league made a public announcement late that morning, and what
happened in the ensuing hours was a dramatic demonstration of the
weight of the NFL. Tagliabue's decision, in the apt words of Sports
Illustrated’s Peter King,“gave a waffling sports world its sense of
direction.” Virtually every other organization fell in line. Major League
Baseball announced within hours that it would not play until the
following week. College football, caught in a litany of different
conference reactions, wiped its Division I-A slate completely clean, with
conferences that had announced they would play reversing their field
and postponing. Within the afternoon, virtually every other organization
in American sports, including the NHL, MLS, LPGA, NASCAR, and IRL all
fell into line, canceling games, tournaments, and races in the wake of the
NFL's decision.
“The NFL acted first,” wrote Thomas Boswell in the Washington Post,
“which is appropriate since it is clearly America's dominant game, as
well as a worldwide symbol of the country.”
When the league resumed play on Sunday, September 23, it had, for
the first time ever, completely lifted its blackout rule (as an
accommodation to fans still fearful about attending a public event).
Tagliabue and Upshaw were in Kansas City, where the Chiefs were
playing host to the New York Giants, who surely became the first visiting
team in the history of Arrowhead Stadium to receive a standing ovation
during pregame introductions.
Tagliabue, with his background in the Pentagon and working
knowledge of the nation's security apparatus, was uniquely qualified to
lead the league through the new security realities of the post-9/11
world. At a time when the leaders of every major civic organization in
the country were rushing to become conversant in matters of national

security and terrorism, Tagliabue already was an expert.
What had seemed unthinkable at first—that the league could actually
move the date of the Super Bowl back a week, so as to play its entire
schedule and avoid a truncated playoffs schedule and the accompanying
loss of revenue—actually came to pass. The National Automobile Dealers
Association, which booked 16,000 hotel rooms for the weekend
following the Super Bowl in New Orleans, was initially resistant to
moving their function, but finally consented, acceding to public
sentiment and a financial package of $7.5 million. NADA president
Phillip Brady agreed to change so as to “help the country's healing
process by maintaining important traditions.”
The buildup to Super Bowl XXXVI was bathed in patriotism, and the
league's sense of spectacle and celebration seemed particularly
appropriate for the occasion. ESPN The Magazine, considering the
league's outsized influence, dubbed the country “NFL Nation.” National
Security Adviser Condoleezza Rice told an interviewer of her aspirations
to become the commissioner of the NFL one day. President George W.
Bush declared the game “a national security event,” the first such sports
event so designated, turning ultimate security responsibility over to the
Secret Service, which gave it the sort of top-flight protection usually
provided political conventions or U.N. General Assembly meetings.
The game itself, as well as U2’s stirring halftime concert, showed the
league at its best. For the third year in a row, the league crowned an
unlikely champion, with Bill Belichick's New England Patriots, 12-point
underdogs, rising to upset the heavily favored St. Louis Rams, 20–17.
By the end of the season, Tagliabue finally received his just due. The
Sporting News named him, for the first time, the most powerful executive
in the world of sports. And he was named Sports Executive of the Year
by Street & Smith's Sports Business Journal, which noted that only in 2001,
“as conditions evolved from difficult to horrific to grim, has the full
extent of Tagliabue's leadership become apparent to those outside the
NFL.”
But Tagliabue's next challenge would be even greater. In an era littered
with stories of seemingly invincible enterprises that collapsed under the

weight of their own ambition, it would be his task to chart the course for
the league's future, with two sets of owners attempting to pull the league
in opposite directions.
By the dawn of the new century, there were two distinct models for
successful sports enterprises in contemporary America.
The first, built over decades and characterized by such high-prestige
entities as the NFL, the Olympics, and the NCAA basketball tournament,
might be called the traditional model. Each of these events consented to
an increased number of advertising breaks over the years (the NFL
allowed thirty-five minutes of commercials during the game, not
including the breaks during halftime). While the television timeouts
were numerous, the events themselves were largely free of advertising,
with the field and uniforms and interior of the venues being “clean,” in
the industry parlance. That allowed those watching the events to focus
almost entirely on the event itself. The traditional model echoed a
Rozelle maxim, repeated more than once at meetings, in which he
emphasized that “while the game is being played, the product we're
selling is the National Football League.” In this model, the game itself
was the primary “brand.”
But by the ’90s there was a different model emerging, one best
exemplified by the NASCAR racing circuit, in which the cars being raced
were advertisements themselves. In the English Premier Soccer League,
each club's uniform included jerseys in which the team logo was dwarfed
by its sponsor's emblem. The appeal to advertisers of this system was
obvious. But there was also a danger, a risk that in the ever-growing
quest for revenue the events and sports would become nothing more
than a means to an end, existing purely as a vehicle for advertisers.
Many sports trying to scrounge out that last few million increasingly
succumbed to similar temptation: Major League Baseball allowed Fox, in
its World Series broadcasts, and ESPN, in its telecasts, to run
superimposed signage behind home plate during the games. And freed of
the guiding hand and philosophy of the NCAA (which had clean venues
at all its championship tournaments), college football bowl games had
become glutted with in-game signage, the import of any game often
obscured by what could at times seem like a four-hour corn chip
commercial.

Up to the present day, the NFL has remained scrupulous about keeping
commercial signage from intruding on the game. Some of the TV clutter
— sponsorship tie-ins with starting lineups and statistics—was
eliminated, at the NFL's behest, in the 1998 deal. As Tagliabue was
proud to point out, “The playing field itself is free of commercial
markings, the sidelines are free of commercial markings except to the
extent the league authorizes commercial markings on the sidelines, and
up to this point the commercial identification on the sideline has to do
with the products that are intrinsic to the game: the uniforms, Gatorade,
drinks, the Motorola headset. We've kept the commercial markings to
products which are integral to the game. Those are the bright lines. We
continue to have a very wide consensus in support of our resolutions
that stadium signage and advertising shouldn't be visible at field level on
television.”
But there was greater pressure from owners for the league to market
itself more aggressively. In 2000, after Austrian's exit, all the league's
ancillary interests were grouped under the heading of NFL Business
Ventures. Some worried that executive vice president Roger Goodell, the
capable consensus builder who'd helped hammer out solutions on some
of the league's thorniest issues, like expansion and realignment, was too
much in the thrall of revenue building. “He uses terms like ‘monetize’
and ‘commoditize,’ ” said one owner with distaste.
Meanwhile, the push for greater revenue grew insistent. Ads were
already showing up on the jerseys of players in the NFL Europe league
(formerly the NFL's World League of American Football), and the
international broadcast of the Super Bowl sold the rights to the
electronically superimposed first-down line, which in those broadcasts
was a strip advertising FedEx. Neil Austrian, pondering how long the
league might remain above the fray, said, “There may be some owners
that, if the NASCAR model came to the league and you could put five
more decals on some of these uniforms and they pay you $150 million, I
can't tell you how they'd vote. I think the dollars have gotten so large
that, when you pay $700-plus million for a team, you start to look for
any and every way to make money. So I think it would really depend. I'd
like to think that there's enough self-discipline and enough preservation
of the past that they wouldn't do that, but I'm not so sure.”

The battle became a constant refrain at league meetings. After one
extended argument about branding, the Steelers’ Dan Rooney sent Roger
Good-ell a football jersey mocked up with a dozen NASCAR-style
corporate logos. “This,” wrote Rooney to Goodell, “is what we're trying
to avoid.”

Ultimately, the real business tension of the new century would not be
over areas where the league had historically shared revenue—in
television contracts and gate receipts—but in areas where it hadn't. The
fastest-growing area of income since 1998 came in unshared stadium
revenue—stadium sponsorships and luxury suites and the like—that was
used to calculate the salary cap but wasn't shared among league
members, creating what some clubs, borrowing from the lexicon of
politics, referred to as an “unfunded mandate.”
The percentage of league revenues that was unshared was growing at
an alarming rate, from 12 percent in 1994 to 21 percent in 2003. Some
of the largest-revenue teams like the Redskins were spending less than
40 percent of their revenue on the salary cap, while others, such as the
Colts, were spending more than 70 percent. The revenue gap between
the top quartile of teams and bottom quartile had grown markedly in the
previous years, and it seemed that, sooner or later, it would affect
competition on the field.
And while the league's record on key decisions remained strong, the
accumulation of outside interests and financial pressure had begun to
wear on the “football people.” The battleground in 2003 became the
future of NFL Europe, the developmental league that served as a minor
league proving ground for teams and as an international outreach
program for the league. To the business leaders in the league, NFLEL
didn't “monetize” sufficiently. To those directly involved with
competition on the field—and who had seen the hundreds of NFLEL
players make contributions on NFL rosters—complaints about the
nominal costs (about $500,000 per club per season) weren't merely
shortsighted, they were blind. The league eventually renewed its
commitment, but by the summer of 2003, the Chiefs’ Carl Peterson had
grown vexed with the ongoing debate.
“This is the only place where we have a chance to develop our
product,” he said of NFL Europe. “We'd be out of our mind to say, ‘Oh,

this is too expensive,’ and let it go. Unbelievable. You know, we sit in
those meetings, for so long and for too many years, and we talk and we
talk and we talk about everything but football. We talk about litigation,
we talk about ‘Al Davis is fucking us,’ we talk about Reebok, we talk
about TV—we don't talk about our product. You know, we can't forget
that we play the game of football. The National Football League is the
National Football League.”
Against this backdrop of conflict over the future direction of the
league, there was the runaway spectacle that was the modern Super
Bowl. It was at once the league's crown jewel and its most anomalous
product, the football game put on by the NFL that looked and felt least
like an NFL football game.
For cultural impact, the game and the civic holiday weekend
surrounding it were unrivaled. Two out of every five American
households were tuned into the game. It was the weekend each year in
which Americans scheduled the most at-home parties and the fewest
weddings. Thanksgiving was the only day they consumed more food.
The Super Bowl was the TV program most watched by men each year, of
course, but also the program most watched by women, and by children,
and by senior citizens, and by blacks, and by Hispanics.
It rose to this prominence on the power of the interest in the game
itself. The Super Bowl's halftime show, through much of its first twentyfive years, had often been considered a forgettable dud. Rozelle's own
musical taste tended to the comically bland (Mantovani among them),
but even he grew fed up with the saccharine pep of Up With People,
who'd played in Super Bowl IX, and returned for Super Bowl XIV.
Rozelle began his postmortem meeting with his staff the day after that
game by announcing, “There are three words that I don't ever want to
hear again: ‘Up With People.’ ”
Through the ’80s, the game's halftime extravaganza was less obviously
awful, but every bit as bland—parade float extravaganzas, stadium card
shows, and B-list entertainments like a presentation featuring eightyeight grand pianos, Chubby Checker, and the Radio City Rockettes—and
that owed more to amusement-park theme shows than any meaningful
adult entertainment.

But with Super Bowl XXVI in Minnesota, held in 1992 with the
Redskins beating the Bills, the league faced competition. The Fox TV
series In Living Color announced it would produce a live twelve-minute
sketch that would begin the same instant the halftime show did. The
following year, the NFL responded, by luring pop music's biggest name,
Michael Jackson, to conduct a frenetic ten-minute halftime mini-concert.
From there, the league moved quickly toward making all of the ancillary
elements of the game live up to that scale of spectacle. In 1998, just
minutes after the scintillating Broncos-Packers finale in Super Bowl
XXXII, at a time when the crowd was transported by John Elway's
ultimate triumph and the AFC's first win in fourteen years, the league
felt compelled to wheel out the ’70s act Three Dog Night to play a song
as a prelude to that trophy ceremony.
In an effort to incorporate more popular musical acts into the Super
Bowl pregame and halftime shows, the league often chose the unique
illogic of television awards shows, drawing from numerous genres of
entertainment to increase interest. The result was that music
presentations, already taken out of their customary context, seemed to
have no internal logic whatsoever, as in 2001 when Ray Charles's
moving, beatific rendition of “America the Beautiful” was used as a leadin to the boy-band heartthrobs the Backstreet Boys performing the
national anthem.
The entire spectacle could at times come off as catering to the worst
impulses of American excess. Writing about the Buccaneers’ victory over
the Raiders in Super Bowl XXXVII in 2003, Slate’s Robert Weintraub
noted the schizophrenic array of acts that accompanied the game. “On
the whole, the game of games seemed to play second banana to San
Diego's version of the American Music Awards, starring [Celine] Dion,
the Dixie Chicks, etc. If I were a Bucs fan, I'd be pretty upset that the
presentation of the Lombardi Trophy, the moment that made a quartercentury of acute psychological pain worthwhile, had to wait for a
performance by Bon Jovi.”
“At some point,” said Packers GM Ron Wolf in 2000, “the Super Bowl
no longer became a game, but it became a show. And from that, football
no longer became a game, it became a business.”
And so it was that, at the height of its popularity, a sense of looming

crisis pervaded the owners’ meetings of the NFL. At the conclusion of the
league's annual meetings in 2003, at the Arizona Biltmore, where George
Halas used to spend his winters, the Bengals’ Mike Brown sat down in an
easy chair in a lobby outside of the owners’ conference room.

Brown, in many ways an anachronism, was the most maligned and
perhaps the least understood man in pro football. The team his father
had owned and coached into the playoffs had, after Paul Brown's death,
become something of a disgrace. The Bengals were mocked for
everything from their series of poor drafts (yielding such first-round
busts as David Klingler, Ki-Jana Carter, and Akili Smith) to their
legendary thriftiness (bringing in the 350-pound lineman Tony Siragusa
for a free agent visit, they alienated him from the start by sending him a
coach-class ticket).
Mike Brown was staunchly pro-league, yet was not viewed in the
public eye in the same way that other second-generation NFL owners,
like Dan Rooney or Wellington Mara, were. One outraged fan established
a Web site called mikebrownsucks.com, in an attempt to exert public
pressure for him to step aside. What hurt Brown most, perhaps, was the
misbegotten notion that he didn't care about winning (he'd once
screamed so loudly at an Isaac Curtis touchdown in 1976, his hearing
hadn't been the same since), or that he didn't know football (in a real
sense, after a childhood spent in football camps, a college career as a
player, and his entire adult life in administration, Brown knew little
else). The criticism had left him shell-shocked. He removed his own
picture and bio from the Bengals’ press guide and seemed to withdraw
even further from the public eye. Planning a banquet in the spring of
2003 with Cincinnati business leaders, many of whom had been critical
of the organization in the past, Brown took pains to deflect any attention
from himself. “The focus is not going to be on me,” he told one league
executive. “They would like to drive a stake through my heart.”
But there were at least two sides to this story. That same spring, the
Bengals hired Marvin Lewis—the gifted architect of the Ravens’ recordsetting defense in 2000—to be their head coach. Lewis became the third
active black coach in the league, and the first since fall 2002 protests by
Jesse Jackson and Washington lawyer Cyrus Mary prompted the league
to reexamine its record for hiring diversity.

“I can remember my dad's generation,” said Tony Dungy. “Everyone
rooted for the Dodgers and everybody rooted for the Browns. The
Bengals get lumped into the behind-the-times organization, no visionary
thinking. Maybe that's true, but I still go back to Mike Brown and his
brother and his dad in Cleveland. We wouldn't be anywhere close to
where we are now without the Cleveland Browns’ influence.”

Contemplating the state of the league's business concerns, and his
decision to name the Bengals’ new stadium after his own father, rather
than selling it off to a corporate sponsor, Brown spoke with an unusual
firmness.“I don't see the National Football League as a strictly business
operation. I see it as a sport-hyphen-business. And to me that's a
different thing. Just making the most money possible is not the ultimate
goal. The ultimate goal is to have a good team, to have success on the
field. To have the thrill when you have a championship team and the
hometown gets involved in it.”
When Brown walked away, one NFL executive turned to a reporter,
rolled his eyes, and whispered, “He is so out of it.”

25

The Main Thing
“Me and the boys got some work to do.
You wanna come along? It ain't like it
used to be, but it'll do.”
Edmond O'Brien's Sykes, in The Wild
Bunch

O

n a perfect August day in New Jersey, from his sparkling Sea
Girt, New Jersey, home that sat just a block away from the
Atlantic Ocean, a tanned and fit Bill Parcells tried to explain the lure of
coaching.
“I grew up,” he said, “in an environment where every day you went to
the schoolyard or the playground, and every day you're playing from
morning till night to find out who's best. If it was kickball, if it was
basketball, if it was after dinner off the front steps of the porch, that's
what it was, and I really never left that environment. [Coaching was]
like an adult version of what I did as a young guy.”
It was August 2001, and Parcells was prepared to spend his second full
season in self-imposed retirement. He'd had offers to return, had
demurred, and felt confident that “if I can make it through January,”
he'd be retired for good.
Then again, he'd said that after the 1999 season, when he took his
New York Jets team decimated by early-season injuries and an 0-5 start,

and rallied them to a strong finish in which they wound up 8-8. He knew
it was perhaps his best coaching job ever, and he also knew that he
couldn't possibly keep up the pace. He retired, for good he said, and
commemorated the season with a book titled The Final Season: My Last
Year as Head Coach in the NFL. For the next three years, he did some
radio and TV, watched a lot of sunsets, and went to a lot of horse races.
He came agonizingly close to taking the Buccaneers job in 2002, but
pulled back at the last instant. He had utterly nothing to prove: he was a
certain inductee into the Pro Football Hall of Fame, wealthy beyond his
dreams, finally able to spend time with Judy, his wife of nearly thirtyfive years. But the game still exerted its pull. He continued observing
players with a keen eye, spent many nights in late night phone calls with
longtime friend Al Davis.
By January 2003, Parcells was restless, divorced, and ready to step
back in the fray. He didn't merely return, but chose to come back to the
Cowboys, perhaps the most stressful head coaching job in the NFL,
working for an owner who was notorious for his hands-on commitment,
and coaching a team whose fan base was famously impatient with
anything short of league-wide domination.
Parcells returned harboring few illusions about the toll that coaching
took, or his own susceptibility to its stresses. It had happened to him
time and time again: in training camp, he was fit and trim, with plenty
of exercise and good stamina. By the end of the season, he'd have gained
twenty pounds, stopped exercising, started to compulsively overeat, and
would feel his body running down, victim of the accumulated stress and
effort.
It had brought back Dick Vermeil, who'd retired two days after the
Rams’ Super Bowl win, then returned a year later to the Chiefs, after a
plea from his close friend Carl Peterson. In 2004, it would lure Hall of
Fame coach Joe Gibbs, out of football for over a decade, back to the
Redskins.
They were aging men in a young man's game, but the signal and
complex pleasures of being the leaders of men were irresistible. “There
are no gray areas in this business here,” said Parcells. “Your earnings
aren't kind of going up, and your quarterly reports don't kind of look
better. You either won or you lost.”

The Steelers’ patriarch, Art Rooney, once recalled riding with Vince
Lombardi on a coast-to-coast flight, and hearing him talk “about how
lucky you must be to win a title. Like a golfer who remembers each shot,
Lombardi remembered all the breaks of the season that went in his
favor, fumbles recovered, punts that rolled out of bounds instead of into
the end zone.”

More than ever before, those breaks and bounces determined the
outcome of games in a league that had attained a new zenith in
competitiveness. Once the effects of free agency and the salary cap
worked their way through the system by the late ’90s, talent was more
evenly distributed, meaning that the margin for error was even smaller
than before. The talent that a team assembled was also more transitory,
meaning the course of a single season had an even greater urgency. In
the new era, teams rose or fell more sharply than they had in the past.
NFL games in the new century had become consistently exciting, fluid,
intense contests whose back-and-forth pace was evident even through
the league's more frequent commercial breaks. The games were not
merely closer, but more free-flowing. In 2002, eighteen teams won
games in which they'd trailed by ten points or more at some point in the
fourth quarter. That happened only twice in 1973.
The margin of error had never been thinner. With two weeks left in
the 2002 season, thirteen of the sixteen teams in the AFC were still in
contention for the playoffs, but none had clinched. Kansas City would
lead the league in scoring that season, but its young defense blew three
double-digit leads, and the club wound up 8-8, in last place in the AFC
West. Had the Chiefs held on to those three leads, they would have
finished 11-5, won the West, and had the conference's number one
overall seed.
So much in the game couldn't be controlled—Bill Walsh was
convinced that there was a 20 percent chance factor in the outcome of
games—that what coaches could control they did, obsessively. So along
with the added pressure of the modern game came a curious paradox.
Even as coaches had less control over players off the field, they'd
assumed more over players on the field. Coaching was, arguably, more
important in football than any other sport. And with less distance
between the best and worst teams, it was more important than ever

before in the NFL.
There were numerous reasons for this. For one, players came out of
college less technically sound than they had ten years earlier. “Kids
aren't playing football in their backyard anymore,” said the Bengals’
Marvin Lewis. “They're playing it with their thumbs.” Rookies needed
more teaching, but in the pressurized new environment, they were also
being rushed into action sooner.
While free agency gave general managers and personnel directors
more influence, with the ability to acquire pro talent as well as college
talent, this freedom was tempered by the knowledge that the players
brought in had to fit the coach's system. And thus the coach's role, again,
was paramount. “Each football team has a center of their own universe
and it's their head coach,” said Charley Armey, the Rams’ president and
GM. “The rest of us just rotate around it and if he can't make it work, it
doesn't work for any of us. So we have to get him the right things to
make it work.”
The coaching influence extended to the field as well. In a previous era,
Super Bowls had featured a who's who of Hall of Fame and All-Pro
quarterbacks. But since 1999, only one of the ten Super Bowl starting
quarterbacks (the Titans’ Steve McNair) had been a first-round draft
choice still with his original team.
“There are two reasons why teams are getting to the Super Bowl with
average quarterbacks, solid quarterbacks,” said Ernie Accorsi. “One is
there aren't enough great ones in the league. And the coaches today
dominate the game so much, there's so much more scheming, it's so
much more complicated, that to me, they've almost taken players out of
there. The game now has become even more complicated—the players
still decide it, but to less of an extent than they used to.”
It was late 1991, and the Browns had just fired Bud Carson as head
coach. Casting about for a possible blockbuster hire, Art Modell asked
one of his assistants, Jim Shofner, to make a run at Steve Spurrier, even
then an institution at the University of Florida. Shofner was friendly
with Spurrier, had coached him during his playing career with the 49ers.
But Spurrier wasn't merely uninterested, he was cheerfully derisive of
the idea.

“Shof, let me tell you something,” he said. “First of all, just to clear
one thing up, I ain't going to Cleveland, all right? Secondly, you're all
fuckin’ crazy. We have a Skins Game every day at six o'clock.” Spurrier
didn't rule out ever taking a pass at a pro career, but he refused to buy
into the unremitting regimen of the pro game.“I may do it someday,” he
told Shofner,“but I ain't going to do it the way you do it.”

More than a decade later, Spurrier brought his passing system and his
uncomplicated self-confidence to Washington, and vowed that he would
not keep the same long hours as the rest of his competition. Spurrier's
magnetism was a quick hit in the capital, and there was plenty of talk
about his new approach. Then the Redskins won just twelve games over
two seasons, a harried Spurrier resigned at the end of the second, and
that was the end of the latest less-is-more experiment in the pro
coaching ranks.
While pro football players had rhythms of their life that were not that
dissimilar from many wage-scale workers—a steady routine, a few
business trips, an identifiable weekend—the men who coached them had
jobs that had become incredibly stressful, and schedules that were
unrelenting.
Of course, there were limits to the George Allen formula, which
predicated success on outworking one's opponent, and they came in well
before the logical conclusion of mutually assured destruction.
If Parcells and Vermeil were old-school grinders, then Tony Dungy and
Brian Billick represented the new school. Early in Marty
Schottenheimer's tenure in Kansas City, when some staff meetings didn't
begin until after midnight, Dungy and fellow assistant Bill Cowher made
a pact that they would never sleep in the office. When Cowher became
the head coach in Pittsburgh in 1992, he remembered that vow. Dennis
Green had installed the same relatively humane system in Minnesota,
where both Dungy and Billick worked as assistants. They later installed
similar schedules. While the job's demands were still unyielding
—“Whoever designed Christmas was not a football coach,” said Billick—
it had grown more bearable for some of the new breed.
But the new breed was in the minority. The reality was that the
coaching profession still exacted a heavy toll. Jon Gruden, who led the

Bucs to a Super Bowl in the 2002 season, famously got up at 3:17 in the
morning. He was among the majority who attempted to shoehorn as
much work into the day as possible, although few were as productive as
Gruden.

“Coaches are an insecure group,” said Parcells. “More is always better,
less is not better. For the guys who aren't that confident, if you could
practice Sunday morning, some coaches would be happy about that.”
In the culture of competition, there was a fear of leaving any stone
unturned. When he took over for Marty Schottenheimer as the Chiefs’
coach in 1999, Gunther Cunningham was already famous for his work
ethic. Cunningham built a remarkable personal rapport with his players,
based on his melding of old-school language and temper with newschool sensitivity and compassion. But at the helm, with a fifty-threeman roster to oversee and an entire city to answer to, he became the
league's leading micromanager, making sure that the shampoo and soap
dispensers were full in the showers, regulating the length of the shirttails
on players’ practice uniforms, overseeing the team's implementation of a
system of optional computer playbooks.
He was resolute and nearly successful, but never did recover from the
gutshot season-ending loss to the Raiders in 1999 (the Chiefs
surrendered a 17–0 lead at home, and the defeat cost them the division
title and a playoff spot) and the death of Derrick Thomas, from injuries
sustained three weeks later in a car accident. By the 2000 season, with a
roster weighed down with dead money and a hangover from the death of
Thomas, the team lost five straight in the second half to sink from the
playoff race. By then, Cunningham had a haunted look. Trying to
respond to adversity by working harder, he lapsed further into the abyss.
On Sunday, December 24, 2000, the Chiefs played their poorest game of
the year on the last day of the regular season, losing 29–13 to an
indifferent Atlanta squad. On the next day, a grim Cunningham spent
Christmas in his office, arriving at 5:00 a.m. to begin a systematic review
of the season.
“That's just self-inflicted victimization,” said Bill Walsh. “You can
become so possessed at what you do and you want so dearly to be
successful that you'll do anything, you'll sacrifice anything to be
successful. In this case, the sacrifice is your entire existence to satisfy

your own need to convince yourself you're working so hard that you will
be successful. When in reality, it's just flailing at the wind, just howling
at the sky.”
But Cunningham's reaction was hardly unique. Walsh had seen tough
coaches, under times of stress, break down into tears in front of him. In
the modern environment, they were under more pressure than ever
before, subjected to more media scrutiny, and working a year-round
schedule that had escalated in intensity from demanding to punishing.
“We have thought a lot about this issue,” said Jeff Pash, the league's
executive vice president and legal counsel. “But we also know that
there's no way, short of putting bars on the office doors, to keep coaches
away. And if you do that, they're just going to watch film at home. It
never ends.”
Within two weeks of Cunningham's somber Christmas siege, Carl
Peterson had fired him and coaxed his old friend Dick Vermeil out of
retirement to coach the Chiefs. Vermeil had become the most famous
grinder of them all. Back in the early ’80s, when Vermeil and the Eagles
staff were working eighteen-hour days and sleeping most nights in their
offices, his director of pro player personnel, Lynn Stiles, picked up a
book called Burnout: The High Cost of High Achievement, and noted that
his boss seemed to be suffering from each of the main symptoms. Stiles
placed the book on Vermeil's desk one day; two weeks later, Vermeil
returned it with a note,“This doesn't apply to football coaches.” But by
the end of the 1982 season, a spent Vermeil announced his retirement in
a tearful press conference in which he noted he was “emotionally
burned-out.” When he returned to coaching with the Rams fifteen years
later, his kinder and gentler reputation proved mostly a facade. He still
threw himself completely into his work, but had developed enough selfcontrol to know when he'd reached the point of diminishing returns. The
same would hold true in Kansas City. There were no cots in the Chiefs’
offices, but Vermeil and his staff often worked past midnight during the
season. He was more able to pace himself, more able to delegate. And he
needed to be, because in the modern age, the pressure didn't end when
the season did. “It's a six- to seven-day-a-week job in the off-season,”
said Vermeil. “It never used to be quite that bad. Because now there's
just, well, there is no off-season, there's just a time you don't play the

games.”
Beyond all the occupational pressures, three of the league's thirty-two
coaches—Tony Dungy, Herm Edwards, and Marvin Lewis—faced an
additional level of scrutiny. As the league's only black head coaches
during the 2003 season, they knew that their success or failure would
influence the number of doors that would open to black coaches in the
future.
While the 2003 season saw a protracted controversy about whether
Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb was overrated by the media
because of his race, most of the questions of racial fairness were now
focused off the field. To many, the performance of black coaches held a
special significance in a way that that of athletes no longer could.
Because of the job's unique mixture of power, responsibility, and
visibility, being a head coach in the NFL carried an added meaning,
denoting not only black achievement, but also a measure of black
authority in an interracial world.
“For some reason, we're all lumped together,” said Kellen Winslow,
the Hall of Fame tight end. “If one of us fails, we all fail as a group. If
one of us succeeds, we all succeed. That's not fair, but that's the
unfortunate perception.”
No one bore this added burden with more grace than Dungy. But what
made him so fascinating wasn't merely that he stood a fair chance of
being the first black coach to lead a team to the Super Bowl, but rather
that he might— as Bill Walsh had done a generation earlier—help
transform the image of what a coach ought to be like.
Dungy had a deceptively serene countenance, and a soft-spoken
manner that could seem utterly out of place in the violent world of
football, until one examined it more closely. “One of the great lies,” said
Bill Polian, “is that Tony is this Caspar Milquetoast character. Nothing
can be further from the truth. I mean, he's as tough as they come; he just
does it in a really low voice, with no histrionics whatsoever, and you
have two choices, A or B: Do what I say or be gone. Simple as that.”
And in this, some things didn't change. Sooner or later, each coach had
to convince his players that he could lead them. In his first year

coaching the Chiefs, Vermeil said of his team,“They don't care what you
know until they know that you care.” Parcells offered an equally proven
system, with a less empathetic manner, counseling his players during a
rookie orientation with the Jets in 1999,“We're not interested in players
with problems,” he said.“We want you to put all the problems you have
behind you. I don't need guys who have pregnant girlfriends that are
calling them on the phone and all that shit. I am too old for it and I don't
care about it. I want guys who can concentrate on being a football
player.”
What Parcells and Vermeil shared, what Billick and Dungy
perpetuated, was that essential trait of commanding respect while
instilling the belief in their teams that they were playing for something
greater than their own paycheck. Though everyone in football was eager
to point out that it was a business, the truth was that on any successful
team, players spoke of care and trust, and the feeling of family.
In return for that commitment, coaches offered a unity of purpose.
“The main thing,” Vermeil was fond of saying, “is the main thing.” It
was an updated variation on Lombardi's “Winning is everything” line,
with the good sense not to say it so explicitly. But it was also a mind-set
that demanded focusing on the task ahead, to the exclusion of all else.
No injury to any player, no matter how bad, would countenance excuses.
Even focusing on it could be a sign of weakness, and so coaches were
forced to take on the willful disbelief of Iraqi Minister of Information
Mohammed Saeed Sahhaf, whose accounts of Iraqi military victories and
boundless optimism continued, even as the 3rd Armored Division neared
Baghdad.
On August 23, 2003, the Jets’ Pro Bowl quarterback Chad Pennington
went down in a freak injury in a preseason game, breaking several small
bones in his hand. The early prognosis was that he would miss at least
twelve weeks, if not the entire season. Suddenly the Jets’ season of
promise looked dead on arrival. When Jets coach Herm Edwards
commiserated with his mentor later in the week, Vermeil told him,
“Herm, you can't have a hero without a catastrophe.” Edwards vowed to
“leave it in God's hands,” and the Jets moved forward, without excuses.
A week later, the Chiefs held their annual kickoff luncheon on the eve
of their last exhibition game. Vermeil, musing on the impact of a team

on a city, said, “You've got to believe … you've got to value the reward
of trying to achieve something. Will it make a difference in your life? Yo
u bet it does. It makes a difference in a city. It makes a difference in the
attitude of people going to work every day. The Chiefs have done that
before and I think the Chiefs can do that again.” In their season-opening
win over the Chargers, Kansas City played a nearly perfect half of
football, rolling to a 24–0 lead, with Priest Holmes—the free agent
discard from Baltimore who'd become the most dynamic back in the
league in Kansas City's system—returning from his 2002 injury and
slicing through the cracks in the Chargers’ defensive wall. They won
going away, 27–9.
Based on the opening week's results of the 2003 season, one could
have safely assumed the following: the Chiefs’ defense would be vastly
improved; the Buccaneers were still the soundest team in the league; the
Bills were a rising power in the AFC East; the Rams would have severe
quarterback troubles; the Steelers would again challenge for the AFC
title; the 49ers were poised for another run in the NFC West; the Patriots
wouldn't be able to survive the dissension that followed the surprising
decision to release safety Lawyer Milloy; Parcells's Cowboys were still a
season away from competing; the Colts hadn't shaken their offensive
funk from the end of the previous season; and the Falcons, even without
Michael Vick, had the look of a playoff contender. Each and every one of
these assumptions would be proved wrong.
But some of those truths would take much of the season to emerge.
Meanwhile, the new season played out like an exquisite serial drama,
whose finish was ever in doubt. At the midway point of the 2003 season,
the two teams with the best records in pro football were the Kansas City
Chiefs, at 8-0, and the Indianapolis Colts, at 7-1. Both teams featured
explosive offenses and improving defenses, both boasted experienced
executives with a long background in personnel, and both coaching
staffs were noted for their experience, player rapport, and unhysterical
leadership.
But the league was so closely bunched that what set the Chiefs and
Colts apart at the halfway point were slender reeds of circumstance,
single plays that turned games in their favor, and unlikely victories
snatched from defeat at the last moment. On October 6, the Colts staged

the biggest late-game comeback in league history, rallying from a 35–14
deficit in the final four minutes to win Dungy's Tampa Bay homecoming,
on his birthday. Six days later, the Chiefs came back from 17 points in
the fourth quarter, on the road at Green Bay, to remain undefeated.

“The thing that most people don't understand is the level of
competition in this league, and how high that is,” said Billick.“The
evidence to prove that is this: a 6-1 team will lose to a 1-6 team. I
promise you, having been on both sides of that, you worry if you're a 6-1
team, playing that 1-6 team. And I'm not talking about worried like
Florida is worried getting ready to play Cal State–Fullerton. You're
legitimately worried, because you know that other club has assets, and
just a couple things go wrong, and it can win. The margin for error truly
is so narrow, that the top and bottom teams are not nearly as far apart as
they once were.” The next day, Billick's words were fulfilled. The 7-1
Colts lost a 20–7 halftime lead and let Jacksonville, a talented 1-7 team,
rally to win.
If there were fewer legends in the modern NFL, perhaps it was because
players and coaches alike were more often exposed, humbled in ways
that an earlier generation of coaches and players hadn't been. After his
Packers fell to Philadelphia in the 1960 NFL championship game, Vince
Lombardi never lost another playoff game. In their six-year run in the
’70s in which they won four titles, the dynastic Steelers played fifty-one
games against teams with sub-.500 records, and lost just one.
But the modern NFL forbade such dominance, and sooner or later,
everyone got nicked. For the previous season's Super Bowl teams, the
hits came sooner. In Tampa, where the defending champion Buccaneers
had begun the season like they'd finished the last, Jon Gruden's highkeyed leadership was unable to arrest a slide brought forth by age,
injury, and a dangerous complacency, the collective belief by a team that
it could increase its tempo and effectiveness at will. But several
statement games passed without a statement from the Buccaneers, and in
week 14, Tampa Bay was eliminated from the playoff race, making it
five straight seasons that the Super Bowl champ from the previous
season was unable to win a single playoff game in the next.
Oakland started slow and never recovered from the loss of quarterback
Rich Gannon in an early-season loss to Kansas City. By the end of the

season, coach Bill Callahan was dealing with festering player resentment
and the Raiders, eleven months from their Super Bowl trip, were an
aging, ineffective 4-12 club.
At the other end of the spectrum, the 5-11 Cowboys of 2002 were
transformed quickly under Parcells, and marching toward a playoff spot.
The Panthers, 1-15 in 2001, were leading the NFC South, with two big
wins over Tampa Bay. And in November, the Bengals—the punch line
for ineptitude in the league over the previous decade—rose up to knock
off Kansas City, the league's last undefeated team, 24–19.
It was the Bengals’ biggest victory in at least a decade, and it offered
proof of Marvin Lewis's impact, and the transformative power of the best
coaches in the business. In the jubilant locker room, the usually
unruffled coach, hoarse and weeping, made a point of holding up a game
ball and telling his team, “The guy I'm most thankful for is Mike Brown,
because he's endured a lot for you guys … he had to put up with a lot of
shit.” Brown wasn't in the locker room when Lewis made the speech, but
received the game ball later on, with Lewis's thanks for giving him and
the team the opportunity to succeed. Brown was not a man of many
words, but he cherished the prize as a sign of better days. He owned
dozens of game balls, but the one he received from Lewis was the only
one he kept in his bedroom at home.
It was only one loss for the Chiefs, but it would turn out to be an
important one. The Chiefs’ defense, led by coordinator Greg Robinson,
favored complex schemes designed to camouflage weaknesses. At an
earlier stop in Denver, Robinson's system had helped the Broncos win
two Super Bowls, but as the season progressed, the defense was
crumbling as badly as it had in 2002. The same Kansas City team that
had been 9-0 and mentioned in the same breath as the 1972 Dolphins
was, by the end of the regular season, 13-3 and being disparaged as
defenseless impostors after a pair of 45-point scorchings at the hands of
the Broncos and Vikings. Such was the crucible of competitiveness in the
modern NFL.
“I think today that competing requires more talent and more merit in
more areas than ever before,” said Tagliabue late in the season. “I think
it's clear that you have to have talent in the coaching area, talent in the
player personnel area, and talent in the cap-management area. If you

make mistakes in those areas the system is unforgiving both in terms of
the financial consequences and the opportunity costs. Some teams are
doing a better job competing in that meritocracy in those three areas. It's
not a random system where people pop up and down on a random basis.
It's a merit-based system and there are no advantages that one team can
secure that another team can't secure. It's a very even playing field and
an unforgiving system.”
With the growth of sports on television came the accompanying
growth of the sports schedule. Competing leagues and sports had spread
their tentacles into an all-consuming, overlapping mass in which major
sports events were held virtually every day of the year. With more than
120 major sports franchises, 117 Division I-A college football teams, and
327 Division I college basketball teams, the calendar was clogged with
an unending torrent of games, broadcasts, results, and previews. Along
the way, the notion of sports as an oasis was often lost.
Against this context of constant activity, one of the NFL's great appeals
was the built-in scarcity and compression of its action. In the space of six
hours on most fall Sundays, fans could watch their own games and
monitor almost all of the rest of that week's action, with only a single
Sunday and Monday prime-time game left. The action was immediate,
surroundable, coherent and all the more exciting because, with so few
games on the schedule, each one was of greater importance (the result of
a single pro football game carried the same competitive weight as ten
baseball games).
This was one of the easily overlooked strengths of the league, and
perfectly complemented the exclusivity of its playoff structure. The two
were interlinked, as the limited number of playoff spots invested almost
every regular season game with a tangible importance. For decades,
there had been a tendency in all sports to increase the playoff field to
maximize postseason revenue (more teams led to more games led to
more money), and to keep more teams’ fans interested throughout the
season. The downside, as the NBA and NHL had learned in recent years,
was that when every quality team was assured of a playoff spot,
individual regular season games often held scant meaning. In basketball
and hockey, the entire regular season served as little more than a very
long and drawn-out qualifying heat that would eliminate less than half

the league's teams for the winner-take-all playoffs. In the NFL, where
home field was more important than any other sport, the advantages
that accrued to playoff teams were both valuable and clearly graduated,
meaning even after a playoff berth was clinched, teams had compelling
reasons to keep winning to improve their seed.

In 2003, New England and Kansas City grabbed the top two AFC seeds
and the bye into the second round, but the next two best teams in the
confer-ence—perhaps, in fact, in the entire league—were Indianapolis
and Tennessee, both in the AFC South. When two excellent teams were
in the same division, the pressure to avoid the wild card, and its threeroad-game route to the Super Bowl, was tremendous. “I've never been in
such a pressure cooker,” the Colts’ Bill Polian said in December. “We've
won eleven games and might win twelve. We are still trying to clinch the
division and we're not going to be in the top two seeds. It seems like
we've been in the chase forever.”
In the final week of the regular season in Houston, the Colts needed a
win to clinch the division, but instead fell behind, 17–3, to a tough,
spirited Texans team. Peyton Manning, as he'd done before, led them
back with a grim efficiency, cutting the lead to seven early in the fourth
quarter, then tying it with four minutes left. The defense, coming off a
shellacking against Denver and with no room for error, stopped the
Texans again, and Indianapolis drove into position in the waning
seconds, before Mike Vanderjagt came on to kick his league-record fortyfirst straight field goal.
While Houston's upset hopes were dashed, other underdogs prevailed.
Detroit, down 20–10 at the half and looking tentative against the Rams,
jumped back in the second half and ran off 27 straight points to knock
the Rams out of the number one NFC seed. In Cincinnati, where the
Bengals needed a win to stay in the playoff hunt, they inexplicably
collapsed against an inspired Browns team that had nothing but pride to
play for.
The afternoon played out in parallel tracks of horror and amazement
in the NFC North. Minnesota and Green Bay were tied for the division
lead, but the Vikings held the division tiebreaker and needed only a win
to advance to the playoffs. Taking a 17–6 lead over hapless Arizona into
the final minutes, they seemed to have matters well in hand. The Packers

were playing concurrently, and as the time melted down in Green Bay,
the atmosphere at Lambeau Field was one of helpless resignation. The
Packers were routing the Broncos, but a Minnesota win would eliminate
the Packers from playoff contention.
With just under two minutes left in Tempe, Arizona scored on a
fourth-and-goal play, with a failed two-point conversion leaving them
still trailing, 17–12. When Arizona recovered the onside kick, there was
a strange eruption back in Green Bay, where the majority of television
sets in the new luxury boxes at Lambeau were tuned into the VikingsCardinals game. By this time, much of the crowd in Lambeau's lower
deck was turned away from the field, looking up at the luxury suites,
craning for a peek at the screen or even the reaction from those in the
boxes.
Back in Arizona, the Cardinals started driving down the field, and got
to the nine-yard line when the Vikings’ defense stiffened. Two
consecutive sacks dashed much of the hope, and the Lambeau faithful
seemed to collectively sag. But the Cardinals scrambled to get one more
play off, the last frantic snap coming with: 04 showing on the clock.
Arizona quarterback Josh McCown scrambled to his right and threw a
dart to Nathan Poole, who came down with one foot in bounds before
being pushed out of the end zone, the officials ruling it a touchdown.
The result played out in a cross-country tableau of nearly instant
reaction, with raucous cheering in both Tempe and Green Bay. The
Packers’ Brett Favre, at the end of an exhausting week in which his
father passed away, paced the sideline with tears in his eyes while, back
in Arizona, the stunned Vikings were dropping all over the field.
It had been another dismal season in Arizona, one that would cost
head coach Dave McGinnis his job. But in an ecstatic Cardinals locker
room, a red-faced McGinnis was bursting with pride. “I've never been
afraid to open myself to you,” said McGinnis to his team, “because
you've got my heart.” With his hand on Nate Poole's shoulder, he said, “I
cut this man four times. And every time I did, he stood up in my office
and said,‘Mac, if you need me, I'll be there.’ ” McGinnis brought his team
together, and they let out one last collective shout. And within twentyfour hours, he was out of a job.
The league's eighty-fourth season thus ended with three of the league's

doormats—3-12 Cleveland, 3-12 Detroit, and 3-12 Arizona—all rising up
for key wins on the final Sunday. That week, NFL games were the toprated program in every NFL market. The upsets also meant that, for the
first time ever, every club in the league had at least four wins. On any
given Sunday, indeed.

Further proof of the tight competition came in the divisional playoff
weekend, January 10–11, 2004, which featured perhaps the finest
quartet of games in a single weekend in playoff history, with all four
decided by seven points or less, two of them in overtime.
The high-powered Rams, trailing Carolina by three at home, drove
near the goal line in the final minute, but enigmatic coach Mike Martz—
recklessly bold in some situations, inexplicably timid in others—chose to
play for the tie instead of the win, and the Rams wound up losing in
overtime. The revived Packers, fresh off an overtime win in the opening
round, outplayed the Eagles on the road in Philadelphia. Facing a fourthand-26 deep in their own territory, the Eagles were rescued once again
by their redoubtable leader, Donovan McNabb, who scrambled free and
found Freddie Mitchell open for a 28-yard gain, allowing the Eagles to
tie the score in the final seven seconds, then win in overtime. The
Patriots, riding a twelve-game win streak, were pushed to the limit by
the resilient Titans, who, for much of the season, looked like the league's
strongest team.
In Kansas City, where the high-flying Colts offense met the free-falling
Chiefs defense, Peyton Manning rose to meet the challenge of the fierce,
raucous Arrowhead crowd, and the Colts advanced, 38–31. The game
was a classic modern-day NFL shootout, featuring no punts. The Chiefs
had come a long way in a year, rising from 8-8 to 13-3, but the
breakdown of the defense cast a pall over their first playoff game in six
seasons, and a day later led to the resignation of defensive coordinator
Greg Robinson. The season-ending press conference the following day,
with Vermeil in a combative, emotional mood, fielding questions on the
defense breakdown, was referred to later by Peterson as “perhaps the
most negative press conference in history for a team that won thirteen
games.” But Peterson was acutely aware of Kansas City's predicament:
three times in nine seasons, his teams had won 13 games and earned a
first-round bye, and all three times they'd lost their first home playoff

game.
That agony of dashed expectations would soon be shared in
Philadelphia and Indianapolis. The savory possibility of a McNabbManning Super Bowl match-up spiced up the championship week
previews, but 2003 was another year for defense. Carolina punished
McNabb and neutralized the Eagles, sending Philadelphia to its third
straight conference championship loss. In New England, as Polian grimly
put it, “our quarterback picked a bad time to have a bad game.”
Manning seemed bothered by the Patriots’ steady rush, and his receivers
were consistently obstructed in their routes, allowing New England to
advance to their second Super Bowl in three years.
The Colts had progressed as well, from a first-round blowout loss in
the 2002 playoffs to a tightly fought championship game setback a year
later. But to understand football people was to understand Bill Polian's
remark that “a 41–0 loss is much easier to handle. When you lose that
badly in the first round, your expectations weren't that high to begin
with. The disappointment lasts only a brief time, because you realize,
‘Well, we weren't good enough.’ But when you get as close as we did to
the big game this year, that hangover lasts.” As the Panthers and Patriots
headed to Houston for Super Bowl XXXVIII, Brian Billick started scouting
free agent wide receivers, Bill Polian began intense negotiations with
Peyton Manning's agent, in search of a new contract that wouldn't wreck
the Colts’ cap status, and Carl Peterson, seeking a new defensive
coordinator for the Chiefs, placed a call to Gunther Cunningham, who
would soon come back to work as a coordinator for Dick Vermeil, the
man who'd replaced him as head coach. The season wasn't over yet, but
for thirty teams, the new quest had begun; it was time to go back to
work.
The thirty-eighth Super Bowl lacked some of the usual pregame
tension and star power. The Patriots were still viewed as a hardy band of
overachievers, and the Carolina Panthers were largely unknown to much
of America. For much of the first half, the game lived down to
expectations, then crackled with urgency late in the half, as the Patriots
capitalized on a fumble to break open the scoring, and Carolina rallied
twice, to make it 14–10.
In the second half, the two teams’ offenses grew increasingly daring

and resourceful, and began answering big plays with big plays. The
game featured the most frenetic finish in Super Bowl history, with scores
on each of the last four drives and six of the last seven. After Carolina
tied the game at 29 with under a minute left, the Super Bowl seemed
destined for its first overtime ever. But then Carolina's John Kasay
shanked the kickoff out of bounds, and the Patriots, starting at their own
40, were marched downfield by Tom Brady, who hit Deion Branch on an
out pattern with 13 seconds left, putting New England in scoring
position. The Patriots’ Adam Vinatieri converted a 41-yard field goal to
win the game, much as he had two years earlier.
For the fourth time in seven seasons, the Super Bowl had been a
spellbinding game, and by its end, had become the most watched event
in television history.
It was a typical performance from the remarkable Patriots. All year
long— in their ability to recover from the traumatic preseason release of
team leader Lawyer Milloy, their resiliency in the face of injuries, and
their poise during crucial situations on the road at Indianapolis and
Denver, the Patriots had shown a special resolve, proving to be a team
whose whole was greater than the sum of its parts.
The Patriots’ cohesion called to mind the words of the All-Pro center
Bill Curry, when reflecting on the kernel of self-reliance at the heart of
the ultimate team game. “There is a moment,” said Curry, “in the fourth
quarter, when you can't put one foot in front of the other and you've lost
14 pounds to dehydration and there's blood everywhere and you hadn't
missed a play. There's not any money that is going to make you run your
face into Dick Butkus. There's not a Super Bowl ring, none of that stuff.
It's just some sort of instinct that says I'm indestructible and I'm going to
whip this other indestructible guy here. Only then do you see a great
team. All the other exterior motives don't work, at some level all you
really want to do is quit. So, then, there is some little flame that never
flickers and it says you're not quitting and it comes from inside. Then you
look at the guy next to you and because you love him—you may not
particularly like him off the field—but on the field you know what he is
and you know what he's going to do. Then, you can't let him down,
cannot let him down. That's how great teams happen. Has very little to
do with moral rectitude or all the things that we love to talk about as

coaches. We would like for them to be in there, but there is something
incredibly moral at that moment when you're looking for a way to just
make yourself put one foot in front of the other.”
The 2003 Patriots had captured that special unity and, in answering
every Panthers roundhouse with one of their own, completed their
unlikely quest in one of the most stirring Super Bowls ever. Around the
league, teams were examining Bill Belichick and his system with fresh
eyes, looking beyond his reputation as a defensive mastermind to the
method behind his personnel decisions, his draft strategy, his symbiotic
partnership with personnel director Scott Pioli, the series of crises and
responses that made the Patriots one of the more compelling stories in
recent memory. There was also a genuine sense of awe over the Patriots’
ability to run off a string of fifteen consecutive wins against a brutal
schedule, in the most competitive era in league history. The
accomplishment was, in its context, every bit as impressive as the
Dolphins’ perfect season of 1972.
Given all those factors and the drama of the game's conclusion, those
who made their living in pro football found it particularly aggravating
that the NFL's big game and the Patriots’ grand accomplishment would,
in the days immediately following the contest, be overshadowed if not
totally obscured by the furor over the cultural train wreck of the Super
Bowl halftime show.
And so a season that began with Britney Spears stripping down to a
bustier in front of the Capitol Mall to open the NFL's Kickoff Weekend
would end with the image of Janet Jackson's exposed breast dominating
the aftermath of the Super Bowl. There was a certain symmetry in that,
to be sure, but many who were closest to the game couldn't help but feel
that somewhere along the line, the league had lost its sense of priorities.
“Why do we do this?” asked one frustrated club executive. “We bend
over backwards and change everything around, just to draw in the
people who least care about the game. And when that blows up in our
face, we have to deal with the embarrassment.”
In the end, the Jackson incident, however embarrassing it was at the
time, was perhaps just that—an incident that could be easily rectified, if

not so easily forgotten. Within two weeks of the game, Tagliabue
announced to the membership that the concert used to launch the
Kickoff Weekend festivities in the previous two seasons wouldn't be held
in 2004, and that the NFL would once again reassert control over the
Super Bowl halftime show.

In truth, there were bigger, more important issues on the table. The
league spent much of the winter successfully fighting a challenge from
Ohio State running back Maurice Clarett that would have struck down
the league's rule limiting draft eligibility to athletes three years past
their high school graduation. In March, Tagliabue presided over a
renewal of the NFL Properties Trust master agreement, which
guaranteed that licensing and apparel revenue would continue to be
shared equally among all thirty-two clubs.
The argument over the Properties Trust had about it the feeling of the
Spanish Civil War—a proxy battle for a much larger, more sweeping
conflict to follow. A committee was appointed to discuss the broader
issue of revenue sharing, and much of the league's future direction
would rest on Tagliabue's ability to find common ground—in the
disparate visions of Mike Brown and Jerry Jones—so as to ensure
competitive balance and financial stability for the long term.
In the meantime, Tagliabue was determined not to stand pat.
November 2003 brought the launch of the league's twenty-four-hour
satellite channel, the NFL Network, piloted by the canny, respected Steve
Bornstein, one of the key architects of ESPN's dramatic rise to power.
Within months, the new network had gained access to some digital cable
carriers, and it was viewed as a key part of the NFL's cable presence in
the next round of TV contract negotiations. The hub of the new network,
and still the most valuable single element of the league's promotional
arsenal, was Steve Sabol's leviathan NFL Films, which in addition to
possessing the largest sports film archive in the world also dramatically
stepped up its new production schedule, and did so in a sprawling new
$40 million facility, which opened in 2002.
At the end of the league meetings, Tagliabue had been receptive to the
owners’ offer of a three-year contract extension, which would extend his
term to the end of 2007. The owners greeted this news, in the words of
one league executive, “like the Democratic party in 1944, after FDR said

he'd stand for one more election.” Indeed, it was a tribute to Tagliabue's
performance that many found it as unthinkable to imagine an NFL
without him as it had once been to imagine a league without Bert Bell in
his heyday, or Pete Rozelle in his.
After the draft in late April, Tagliabue turned his attention to several
tracks: ongoing negotiations with the networks on a new TV package;
with the Players Association on once again extending the all-important
collective bargaining agreement; and discussions with the league's
security forces to prevent any instances of terrorism from occurring at
NFL games.

There were still numerous areas of reasonable concern for the future. But
in virtually every meaningful index—the quality of its play, the level of
its competition, the pay and support structure offered its players, the
power and scope of its publicity apparatus, the devotion of its fans—the
National Football League was not only healthy but thriving.
And even those who'd grown to accept the reality that football was a
business were still struck by the way that the game could, for a while
every January, render all of those business questions irrelevant, if only
for a time.
“You gotta remember the cycles we go through,” said Jay Zygmunt,
the president of football operations for the Rams. “When we're in the
playoffs, we get the game of football at its absolute best. And when you
think about what guys are getting paid, guys who are making millions
and millions of dollars are getting very little money for those playoff
games, in terms of economic compensation. But no one cares. Everyone's
making the same, it's all about the game and ‘We gotta win this game.’
You never hear during that time, ‘Jeez, we only make X amount of
dollars,’ or anything like that. No one ever, ever, ever talks about
anything but ‘How do we win this game?,’‘We gotta win this game,’ ‘We
gotta get to the Super Bowl.’ You finish that cycle out with the Super
Bowl and, again, you have the game of football at its best.”
“The day after the Super Bowl,” Zygmunt sighed, “it's the business of
football at its worst. And you just—you go through it. And that's just the
life cycle.”

EPILOGUE

America's Game

I

n the fall of 1996, just weeks before his death, Pete Rozelle sat in the den of his Rancho Santa

Fe home with his guest Frank Gifford. Rozelle's brain tumor was slowly killing him, and even

talking required an effort, but he still enjoyed seeing his closest friends, especially on Sundays

when they could sit before his bank of four TVs and dial up any game they wanted on his
satellite dish, carrying the NFL's out-of-market broadcast package Sunday Ticket. The afternoon
that Gifford visited, the pair had a light lunch and were just finishing at 1:00 p.m. Pacific Time,

as the networks switched from the early games to the late games. The screens carried visions of a
nation at play—stadiums filled from coast to coast, the breathless updates from studios in New

York and Los Angeles providing highlights of key games, urgent voices analyzing playoff races
and story lines—while Rozelle and Gifford took it all in.

It was a perfect Sunday to be a football fan, and Frank Gifford sat back in his chair, marveling

not at the games so much as the man who'd helped make them so important. He looked at the
bank of screens for a moment, then looked over at Pete Rozelle looking at the screens, and said
softly, “Oh, Pete … you must be very proud.”

Pete Rozelle, face wan, eyes brimming, simply smiled and nodded his head, a fan to the end.
We expect athletes to grow old; that their stardom is fleeting is part of the compact, essential

to the understanding of sports. But with the men who shaped pro football in the modern age,

who helped guide it to its position as the dominant spectator sport in the second half of the

twentieth century, it was tempting to assume that they'd always be around, to guide the game, to
quietly pull the young guns aside and remind them to “think league,” or to bear witness to the
earlier sacrifices of Tim Mara and Dan Reeves, Paul Brown and George Halas.

But after Rozelle's death in 1996, many of the rest quickly passed. Jim Ken-sil died the day of

Rozelle's New York memorial service. Tex Schramm's health was fading in the spring of 2003

when Jerry Jones announced that Schramm finally would be honored in the Cowboys’ Ring of

Honor. A frail but spirited Schramm returned to the Valley Ranch complex for a press conference

to announce the honor, but didn't live to see his actual induction. Don Weiss, even in retirement

a constant presence at league meetings and Super Bowls, passed away in the fall of 2003. Shortly
after Weiss's death, one longtime executive, despairing over the degree that money had come to

dominate league discussions, and the loss of so many of Rozelle's inner circle from the days when

football always came first, quoted Jonathan Franzen's The Twenty-seventh City: “What becomes of
a city no living person can remember, of an age whose passing no one survives to regret?”

Even among owners, the old guard was dwindling. Wellington Mara, cheeks ruddy and eyes

still twinkling at eighty-eight, ventured into the Giants’ offices each day, just as his father had
before him. In 2003, Lamar Hunt, seventy-one years old and still the consummate fan, timed his

prostate removal surgery and extended convalescence during October, around the two Chiefs

national telecasts and their bye week, so he wouldn't have to miss any games. The other
surviving members of “the Foolish Club,” Ralph Wilson and Bud Adams, were still on the scene

and healthy. And the other second-generation owners besides Mara—Dan Rooney in Pittsburgh,
Mike Brown in Cincinnati, Bill Bidwill in Arizona—were there to carry the torch. To a man, they
were still vibrant.

But it was increasingly obvious to Hunt and Rooney and the rest that the fate of the game was

no longer in their hands. They were too few, and they were too far past their prime. Pro football

would ultimately rise or fall not on the decisions of the old guard but instead on those made by
the eighteen new owners who'd joined the league in the past twenty years. Soon enough, the
obligations of institutional memory would fall to the next generation— people like Wellington

Mara's son John; Lamar Hunt's son Clark; Mike Brown's daughter, Katie Blackburn—and their
ability to absorb and relate the lessons passed down.

And what, exactly, were those lessons? Perhaps paramount among them is that the popularity

of a sport is not predestined, and shouldn't be taken for granted.

“Baseball in 1960 was run by people who loved baseball,” said the writer and Red Sox

executive Bill James, “but it was run by people who, because they loved baseball so much,

assumed that there was something ‘special’ about baseball which had propelled it to its
predominant position in the American sports world. And because they made this assumption,
they allowed the game to drift. They didn't really think about the game, as a commercial product;
they still don't. Pete Rozelle, Lamar Hunt, George Halas and the other people who ran pro

football had serious disagreements among themselves, but they all assumed that they had both

the right and the responsibility to shape football into the best possible commercial product that
could be built upon the framework of the game. If the games were boring, they assumed it was

their responsibility to make them more exciting. If the games were too long, they assumed it was
their responsibility to trim the fat.”

The NFL's rise was surely a reflection of its time. The same things that distinguished the

American way of life in the postwar era—the explosion of technology and consumerism, the rise
and refinement of a corporate mind-set—also contributed to the ascendant fortunes of pro
football.

It was tempting to look at the disparate state of the leagues in 2004—with Alex Rodriguez's

trade to the Yankees further skewing the payroll imbalance in baseball, and a spring training full

of allegations about steroid abuse, involving some of the sport's biggest stars and most hallowed
records—as reason enough for the NFL's growing lead over Major League Baseball. And indeed, a

Harris poll in 2003 showed that, for the first time ever, Americans named pro football as their
favorite sport by a two-to-one margin over baseball (29 percent to 13 percent).

But while these developments helped shed light on the NFL's present advantage over baseball

in fan appeal, the fact remained that pro football eclipsed baseball in the ’60s and early ’70s,
before any of those conditions existed.

The NFL would of course not have succeeded so quickly or spectacularly if it hadn't been

uniquely equipped and prepared to take full advantage of television. But there was something

more at work. The New Yorker’s Malcolm Gladwell writes of social phenomena in terms of
“tipping points,” instances in which a single identifiable factor hastens a broad social change. In

that context, the tipping point for pro football's eclipse of baseball may well have been the
creation of NFL Films and NFL Properties in the mid-’60s. At a time when the rest of the sports

world was working in small measures, with cross purposes and provincial sensibilities, the NFL
began a broadly and dramatically unified set of promotional and marketing initiatives. That

clarity of purpose—of the poetic mythmaking of NFL Films, of the high-toned gravity of the
Creative Services branch of Properties, and the consistent quality of the licensed merchandise—
created a sophisticated aura around the NFL that was unthinkable for sports entities at the time.
It was not lost on some of the traditionalists that Properties and Films, two divisions that were at

the heart of much of the modern-day infighting, were created not to maximize profit but to
increase the league's prestige.

It was also useful to remember that pro football had not become America's favorite sport solely

because of some marketing slickness, or because baseball faltered. As Rozelle would have been

the first to attest, the game had started to change for the better long before he took office. It had
been elevated even in the late ’40s by Dan Reeves's vision, Paul Brown's innovations, a

compelling and increasingly integrated cast of players, and the bold coaching initiatives

throughout the league, which held that the greatest gains in football occurred not through the

bludgeoning three-yard ground thrusts but through verve, imagination, and an ability to think
and act on a grand scale.

Then, with the arrival of Rozelle on the scene in 1960, the game was transformed again, a

terrific spectacle elevated to a fully realized alternative universe, with its own set of principles,
rules, legends, and logic.

Out of the war of the ’60s, and the mandate to make the game better, came not just Rozelle's

vision but Te x Schramm's restless intelligence, Lamar Hunt's boundless optimism, and Al Davis's
passionate brinkmanship. It was that superb blending of these philosophies and mind-sets—each

one utterly committed to succeeding within football and the success of football in general— that
helped make pro football such an evocative and compelling pursuit. At the intersection of ideas
and loyalties, all the theoretical abstractions mattered—the exquisitely calibrated tie-breaking

system, the symmetrical divisional setup, the eminently rational schedule rotation. And in the
end, the result was simple: more people cared more about pro football than they did about other
sports.

So the NFL's great triumph in the present day wasn't its $17 billion television contract or its

marvelous new stadiums or even its dominance among American sports leagues. It was that the
game—the uncompromising test of brute strength and speed, tactics and willpower, the essence

of its allure to players, coaches, and fans—had somehow emerged through the magnificent
transformation, and greeted the twenty-first century not exactly unscathed, but still adhering to

its core principles. In a profane and chaotic age, in which much of what made sports special had

been sold off to the highest bidders, the game had preserved the still sacred space of its field. The
spectacular edifice that Bell strived for and Rozelle made manifest had been held together and

improved by Tagliabue—a brilliant engineer who anticipated many of the league's challenges and
addressed them with skill and vision. The league was better conceived, better organized, and
better run than its competition, and that was not incidental to its popularity.

During the filming of Oliver Stone's fabulist football drama Any Given Sunday, the former tight

end Jamie Williams, who served as the movie's football consultant, said, “Baseball is what
America aspires to be, football is what this country is.”

In terms of aspiring to peace and living with violence, Williams may have been right, but when

examining the support structure of the respective leagues, he had it backward. The NFL, with its
egalitarian framework, was much more consistent with American aspirations of equal

opportunity and pure meritocracy than any other major team sport. And Major League Baseball,
for all its timeless tradition, reflected nothing so much as the growing economic stratification of
modern American society.

Yet the league's business success often obscured the more intangible responses that the game

elicited. It was true that the NFL was the country's wealthiest sports league, and its policies often

served to make rich men much richer. But it was just as true—and, arguably, more important—
that pro football has served, within communities and across the country, as an important social
glue, a measure of the meaning of a city and its citizenry, a nation and its self-image. Through it

all, the teams still carried a power and imprimatur that was impossible to valuate. It was scarcely

possible to talk at length about the self-perception and identity of cities like Cleveland and
Kansas City, Buffalo and Pittsburgh without mentioning the football teams. One could decry this
reality, but it was a fact of modern urban life.

At the same time, it must be added that all the face-painting, tailgating, and rhythmic chanting

could appear tame, perhaps even quaint, to those accustomed to the more combustible culture of

European and South American soccer crowds. The possibility of violence and genuine physical
danger was a reality for soccer fans throughout much of the world, yet that same menace among

fans was virtually absent in big-time American sports. This was a reality open to interpretation,

and some chose to view the relatively low levels of crowd violence in the United States as a sign

of the country's generosity of spirit and sophisticated understanding of sportsmanship. Others,

like the Australian David Hill, the head of sports at Fox, judged that “soccer fans in England and

Europe are far more passionate than fans here.” For better or worse, the closest American sports
fans came to what the English writer Nick Hornby described as “the communal ecstasy” of a

jubilant soccer crowd was in the NFL on late fall and winter Sundays, when games and seasons
hung in the balance and cities mobilized to witness the action, gathering at stadiums and around
televisions in countless living rooms and bars throughout each city.

And it was this level of involvement that was the league's central strength, not only in the big

markets, but across the country. By the beginning of the 2004 season, the Cleveland Browns had

gone forty years without winning a title. The Jets hadn't been to a Super Bowl in thirty-six years,

the Chiefs thirty-five years, the Colts thirty-four years. Yet in the modern NFL, unlike much of
Major League Baseball, hope could still spring eternal. In the fans’ loyalty was the reminder that

sports is never just entertainment, nor just a business. This was a core truth, and the league
trifled with it at its own peril.

“ To me, the fans are the real purists,” said Ernie Accorsi,“because they have nothing to gain.

They have no winning share, they get no break, they pay their way in, they put up with the
discomforts, they have to live with the detachment. So with me, they're the all-time selfless, pure

people. That's why I give them so much of the benefit of the doubt, even when they write me and
criticize everything I'm doing, because I know, with them, there is nothing at stake here but
emotion and love with their team.”

The game exerted its pull from within as well. For those like Carl Peterson and Bill Polian, the

allure of the Super Bowl ring continued to be a potent symbol, the talisman they'd pursued
throughout their careers. John Madden said that winning one made it much easier for him to
retire two years later. And if he hadn't won? “I'd probably still be coaching now.” Will Shields,

after nine Pro Bowl seasons, still looked on winning a ring as “validation, a justification for all

the time and the years spent.” Jack Faulkner, who came to the pros on Sid Gillman's Rams staff

in 1955, would concur. Faulkner was in his forty-fifth year in pro football, working as an
advance scout for the Rams, when they went on their miracle run in 1999. In December of that
year, Faulkner lost his wife of fifty years. A month later, he won his first championship. He cried

when the ring was presented to him the following summer, and laughed out loud when Al Davis,
his fellow assistant from Gillman's legendary staff of 1960, saw him wearing it. “Look at how big

that goddamn thing is,” complained a mock-outraged Davis, who naturally vowed that the next
Raiders ring would have to be larger.

Ye t the deeper they got into football, the more that players and coaches alike learned that it

wasn't about the ring, so much as the signal effort to acquire it.

On August 3, 2002, Bill Polian traveled from Indianapolis to Canton for Jim Kelly's induction

into the Hall of Fame. Some of the pain from the Bills’ four Super Bowl losses had diminished by
then, and the induction served as a reunion of sorts for that memorable team and its diehard

fans. The evening of the induction, Kelly hosted a party at a Canton hotel. Friends and family
came, and many of the Bills fans who had driven from upstate New York to Canton were staying

at the same hotel. At one point, a member of the Bills grabbed Polian from the ballroom and told
him that many of the players were looking for him.

They'd all assembled in a small anteroom off the ballroom. When Polian walked in, he was

greeted by the men with whom he'd been through the glory years in Buffalo. Not only the
superstars like Kelly and Bruce Smith and Darryl Talley, but dozens of less famous players, like
Kenny Davis and Kent Hull and Steve Tasker, along with Marv Levy and several of his assistants.

The wives drifted off after a while, and soon there was the atmosphere not unlike the flight back
from one of the Bills’ many road wins, a group of thirty-five to forty men sitting in a sweeping
semicircle in a small room. They sat and drank beer, reminisced, laughed, and basked in the
wash of memories.

At one point, Polian was distracted by a series of flashes from a nearby doorway. He turned to

look, and saw dozens of Bills fans, lined up three and four deep, straining to take pictures. Bruce

Smith invited them in, and the players and coaches lined up until the crush for photographs grew
so great that Kelly finally led his coaches and teammates out to the ballroom bandstand, where
hundreds of fans stood snapping pictures for nearly fifteen minutes.

Later, as Polian was leaving the bandstand, a couple introduced themselves and asked if he

would mind posing for a picture with them.

“Not at all,” said Polian. “I'm honored. But tell me, why is there so much excitement over this?

I mean, I understand Jim is who Jim is, and what he's done for Buffalo and what have you, but
…”

The woman leaned toward Polian and said, “You must understand: that was the happiest time

of our lives. We just wanted to be close to you guys again.”

As the perceptive English writer James Lawton put it in his outsider's view of the sport, pro

football “is an activity that observes many of the conventions of sport, but always the game has a
meaning and a psychology that can never be contained within the parameters of the field. This,

of course, can be true of other sports, but in American football the point is insistent. If all sport is
a magnificent triviality, American football seems least tolerant of the limitations.”

It was an observation that would have made perfect sense to Paul “Tank” Younger. The first

player from a historically black college to play in the NFL had blazed some trails and been

denied others—many thought he could have been the NFL's first black general manager. But as
he sat in his trim bungalow in Los Angeles in the spring of 2001, his body withering but his face

still bright and full of life, only months before he'd pass away, Younger's face lit up as he spoke
of the sport and what it meant to him.

A visitor had asked Younger about racial progress, and its limitations. He had at once

internalized all the rebukes yet seemed to lack the spoiling core of bitterness. He had seen

changes on the field that reflected the larger changes in American society. The game was
imperfect, but it was his game, and Younger was forever marked by his time spent in it.

“I considered it an honor to play in the league,” said Younger. “And I believe that when you go

on that field, you have a responsibility, not only to yourself, but to your ball club and to the fans.
I believe that. You hear a lot of folks talk about coaches giving pregame talks, inspirational

speeches, and all that bullshit in the dressing room prior to a game. My inspirational speech was
when they played the National Anthem. That really got me fired up. It always fired me up and I

wanted to go hit somebody. Shit, when they sang ‘o'er the land of the free and the home of the
brave,’ I'm ready to go knock the hell out of somebody. And I feel that way today. I'll be watching

a game, they play the National Anthem, goddammit, my blood starts boiling. I felt I owed a
responsibility to myself, to my team, and to the fans that had plunked down their bucks to come
see me play. Always felt that way.”

And there was, in Younger's dedication and fans’ response to it, a hint at the quality that made

football the most American of games, and likely the most misunderstood. Though the NFL would
continue to market itself overseas, many in the game had come to the conclusion that there was,

at the bottom, something essentially untranslatable about the sport and America's obsession with
it.

And perhaps that was for the best. Pro football was, in a way that baseball and basketball

could never be, distinctly our own, and it defied easy characterization. “I reject the notion of
football as warfare,” said a character in Don DeLillo's novel End Zone. “Football is discipline. It's
team love. It's reason plus passion.”

In the end, Jacques Barzun was not necessarily wrong. To know America, one may well still have

to know baseball. But to understand the world's only superpower at the dawn of the new century,

its passion and preoccupations, idealism and contradictions, it is necessary to understand the
National Football League, and its profound impact on its audience.

After Elvis Presley's death in 1977, the rock critic Lester Bangs wrote that “we will never again

agree on anything as we agreed on Elvis.” After a generation of ever more numerous

entertainment options in modern American pop culture, in a land increasingly divided by

demographics and sensibilities, narrowcasting and niche marketing, it can safely be said that we
will never agree on anything the way we agree on the National Football League. Pro football is
our biggest civic tent, our last genuinely mass entertainment.

There always remains the possibility of decay from within, or a failure to maintain faith with

its fans. But for the foreseeable future, the sport will reign across the gleaming, twenty-first-

century American landscape, as modern as the digital age, as timeless as the most primal urge for

tribal identification, the quintessential pastime of modern America. Pro football has become the

perfect symbol for the country's bustling, modernistic urgency, a splendid entertainment, a taxing
and transforming profession, and a meaningful metaphor for the most American pursuit of all,
those seemingly mismatched but inextricably bound ideas of competition and community.

AFTERWORD TO THE ANCHOR BOOKS EDITION

In February 2005, the New England Patriots won Super Bowl XXXIX—their second straight world
championship, and third in four seasons—outlasting the Philadelphia Eagles, 24–21. Just over
two months later, the National Football League announced that starting in 2006, it will move its

Monday Night Football package from ABC, where the series had run since its inception in 1970, to
ESPN.

The two events are hardly related—one took place on the field, the other in a series of

boardrooms and private negotiations about as far from the game as anything involving football
could possibly occur—but both offer telling revelations about the realities of pro football in the
twenty-first century, hinting at the changes that are shaping the future of America's Game.

On the field, the Patriots rose to become the first dynasty built during the free agency era, a team
in the truest sense, whose bedrock foundation was the strong leadership of head coach Bill

Belichick and vice president of player personnel Scott Pioli. Belichick had experienced mixed
success as a head coach from 1991–95 in Cleveland, but after another tenure as Bill Parcells's top

assistant in New England and New York in the late ’90s, he was more prepared for the demands

of head coaching when Patriots owner Robert Kraft hired him in 2000. When Belichick accepted
the job, he brought along longtime friend and colleague Pioli—a former Division II defensive
lineman at Central Connecticut State—who had first worked for Belichick in Cleveland, and later
in the ’90s on the staffs of the Patriots and Jets.

The two had met in the summer of ’86, when Belichick was the defensive coordinator of the

Super Bowl champion Giants, and Pioli was a college student who spent his off days in the
summer making the ninety-minute drive from his Washingtonville, New York home to the
campus of Farleigh Dickinson University in Madison, New Jersey, just to watch the Giants
trainingcamp practices and learn more about the game. Impressed with the student-athlete's

sincere curiosity, Belichick invited him to stay for a while and observe the coaching staff at work.

During his extended stay, Pioli watched practices from the field, sat in with Belichick in the film

room, and absorbed the work ethic of the Giants’ staff. “The thing that stood out to me as a kid

who was never exposed to big-time football was the amount of work that they put into football,”
said Pioli. “And I don't mean the physical work of the players, I mean the time that the coaches

put in, to see that you could actually spend eighteen hours a day, completely immersing yourself
in football. I remember thinking to myself, this is what I want to be doing eighteen hours a day.”

In New England, they were the two key football decision makers working under owner Robert

Kraft. In 2000, Belichick and Pioli survived a 5–11 season with a club whose personnel and

salary-cap structure, in which a great deal of money was tied up in just a few contracts, clearly
needed to be overhauled.

Then, in the off-season of 2001, they signed twenty-four free agents, seventeen of whom made

the team the next season. The group included two team captains, seven full-time starters, three

special teams regulars, and two defensive backs who had seen extensive playing time in nickeland-dime packages. The seventeen free agents—who collectively received signing bonuses
totaling less than the one Seattle gave to former Patriots defensive tackle Chad Eaton the same

off-season—formed the nucleus of the Patriots team that won the last nine games en route to its
Super Bowl win that season.

Though they took a step back in 2002, the Patriots were the dominant team in football in 2003

and 2004. Belichick's success with defenses is well-known, but he brought more to the job than
just brains. His genuine passion and his lunch-bucket sensibilities were perfectly suited for a
generation of players that often grew tired and suspicious of the bloodless, cerebral “geniuses”
calling the shots on many NFL teams.

For his part, Pioli was a former football player with a sharp eye for football talent, as well as a

keen sense for the effect that individual players have both on the field and in the locker room.

Belichick had been criticized for his tunnel vision in Cleveland—acquiring talented players who
later proved to be a detriment to the team chemistry off the field—but in New England, he and

Pioli took fewer risks with “problem” players, ensuring that his players bought into the team
concept that he espoused.

The Patriots also changed the manner in which they entered the free agent market. When

Belichick had been in Cleveland, the Browns had courted potential free agents like Andre Rison
and Reggie White with limo rides and fancy dinners. But at New England, he quickly shifted
gears. “That's not who we are,” he said one night to Pioli, and so in New England the approach

was different. On his free agent visit, Larry Izzo—the first of the Patriots’ haul of the free agent
signings in 2001—wound up eating pizza in the Patriots’ film room; most players who visited
stayed at the Residence Inn in Foxboro, rather than an upscale hotel in downtown Boston.

Along the way, the Patriots created a model for the new age that many teams were struggling

to copy in 2005. The work ethic of the team was as pronounced as any of the NFL dynasties

dating back at least as far as the Steelers of the ’70s and perhaps even the Packers of the ’60s.
It was reflected not merely in the team's staunch, nearly starless team makeup, but in many

other aspects as well. The Patriots’ mantra, composed by Pioli and printed in red at the bottom of
each page of the team's scouting handbook, was: “We are building a big, strong, fast, smart,

tough and disciplined football team that consistently competes for championships.” The team

was explicitly less concerned with “measurables” than they were with tangible evidence of
players who excelled on the field.

Luck helped—the controversial “tuck” call in the Patriots’ 2001 playoff against Oakland kept

that year's run alive, and two years later John Kasey's inexplicable botched kickoff gave the

Patriots the ball on their own 40-yard line at the end of their Super Bowl XXXVIII battle with the
Panthers.

The best fortune of all came with the team's on-field leader, quarterback Tom Brady, who was

drafted in the sixth round out of Michigan in 2000. After five years in the pros, Brady trailed

only Joe Montana and Terry Bradshaw for number of Super Bowls won by a quarterback. Surely

the Patriots hadn't seen that when they chose Brady. But they saw something in him and put a
higher priority on acquiring him than any of the other teams in the league did.

In an age when players are more aware than ever of their individual value on the open market,

the Patriots’ success emphasized the importance of team chemistry rather than individual

performance. Even the players bought into this belief, none more so than Brady, who in 2004
extended his contract for a fraction of what he might have earned as a free agent.

“The team has goals,” Brady said. “The greater team goal is winning the Super Bowl. That

supersedes what any player goal might be. You have to make decisions as an individual, whether
you want to be part of this team or not. And you're going to have to make sacrifices like every

guy on this team makes sacrifices. I know what's important to me. I know where my priorities
lie.”

So did the Patriots. On the plane back from Jacksonville the evening after the Super Bowl win

over the Eagles, Pioli and Belichick met to discuss roster tweaks and salary-cap status for the
players under contract. The team took part in a victory parade in Boston the next day, and then,

at 7:30 on Wednesday morning, Pioli and Belichick were back at work on the season ahead,
taking part in a morning draft meeting.

It would be months before the rings arrived, but a new season had already begun.
At the league offices in New York, two matters dominated the 2005 off-season. The first was

the ongoing negotiations between the NFL and the networks to renew the television contracts

that were going to expire at the end of the 2005 season. The league, led by executive vice

president of media Steve Bornstein, had renewed part of its TV package, extending contracts with

Fox, CBS, and DirecTV in the fall of 2004. But the league was still dangling its lucrative primetime packages on Sunday and Monday nights into the spring of 2005.

When the deal was finally nailed down in mid-April, ESPN wrested away the Monday Night

Football franchise from fellow Disney subsidiary ABC and agreed to pay $1.1 billion per season
for the right to carry the most prestigious weekly series in sports television. The Sunday night

package moved to NBC, which was back in business with the NFL for the first time since 1998

and would benefit from the flexible scheduling provisions that might improve the desirability of
late-season matchups. Taken together, the deals ensured that the NFL's annual television take
would grow from $2.4 billion per season to $3.7 billion per season, and that the game would
continue to be the dominant spectator-sport franchise on American television.

But it was how to allocate the league's growing revenues, from television and elsewhere, that

formed the crux of the league's greatest challenge.

The collective bargaining agreement with the players had been scheduled to expire in 2008,

though by the spring of 2005, negotiations had been going on for more than a year to renew the
deal. But before such an agreement could be reached, owners would have to decide among

themselves how to most equitably handle the growing revenue disparities among the teams, due
largely to the increasing gap in unshared stadium revenues. It was a tricky negotiation, full of

what Tagliabue liked to describe as “lots of moving parts,” and he tackled it as he did most
challenges, with thorough study and a series of consensusbuilding committee meetings in which
owners tried to iron out their differences.

And they had, of course, every motivation to do so. This negotiation would almost certainly be

the last time that the NFL's Tagliabue and the NFLPA's Gene Upshaw would work to extend their
historic agreement of 1993. The deal had grown in stature with each passing year. As the other

major sports suffered punishing losses from strikes and lockouts, the NFL and the NFLPA had
spent the balance of the ’90s in relative harmony, extending the CBA and working together to
enforce a tougher drug- and steroid-testing program than any other major professional sports
league.

There were plenty of other people involved in the negotiation, but just as they had in the early

’90s, Tagliabue and Upshaw frequently sat down privately and hashed out the intricacies of a

potential deal. After a one-on-one meeting that lasted nearly seven hours on April 15, they spoke
again two days later, and Tagliabue mentioned George Santayana's quote, “Those who do not

learn the lessons of history are doomed to repeat it.” They resolved to heed Santayana's words. It
seemed highly probable that the NFL and the NFLPA would once again find common ground in
mutual self-interest.

So as pro football pushed toward a future that seemed in many ways different from its past

—Monday Night Football on cable, regular season games in Mexico City, and flexible scheduling
on Sunday nights—there was a sense that the caretakers of the game were truly taking care of
the game.

But just as in the days of Pete Rozelle, the ultimate decision is up to the owners of the National

Football League franchises. The people who own those thirty-two clubs are inheritors of one of

the great enterprises in modern American society. The game has a purpose that goes far beyond
business and a meaning that goes far beyond entertainment.

But history, and the fall of Major League Baseball, has shown that the NFL's status is not a

birthright. If pro football falters, it won't be because its players misbehave, or its fans are fickle,

or because the networks drive too hard of a bargain. It will be because, in seeking ever greater
riches, the owners commit the cardinal football sin of taking their eyes off the ball.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I began work on this book in the summer of 1999, and over five years have accumulated
more than the usual number of debts of gratitude.

The greatest are owed to all those who took the time to talk with me about their

experiences in pro football. The game possesses its own language and creates its own

reality, and can be tiresome to explain to an outsider. But many people took the time

and, in so doing, revealed something about the nature of the game: no one chooses a
career in football because they only sort of like it; the game is populated by people who
are passionate about their vocation. This can be seen not only on the field but in locker
rooms and administrative offices, and even by the pool at resort hotels during league

meetings, where I've seen people engaged in heated discussions over whether the NFL's
designated inactive list is “the worst rule in the game” or another crucial tenet of the
league's standard of fairness.

The main character in the NFL's rise to popularity was of course Pete Rozelle, and my

ability to document something of his career and life is the result of the trust and

generosity shown by Rozelle's daughter, Anne Marie Bratton, who opened up Rozelle's

papers, and her home, to me. As a frequent interloper at the Bratton estate, I'm forever
indebted to Anne, her husband, Doug, and their children, Miles and Alexandra, for their

help and hospitality. I also appreciate the extra time taken by Rozelle's brother, Dick
Rozelle, and Pete's longtime friend, John Lehman.

As for Rozelle's predecessor, there is no better source for understanding Bert Bell than

his wry, delightful son Bert Bell, Jr., who provided a wealth of memories, took me on a

tour of his father's Philadelphia, and helped me separate the truth from the fiction about
his father's life.

The NFL's present commissioner, Paul Tagliabue, was here to tell his own story, and

he did so eloquently and with tremendous patience for my novice's understanding of the
law, over what turned out to be twenty-five hours of interviews in several different
sessions.

At the league office, Greg Aiello and his communications staff fielded my calls and e-

mails by the hundreds, and were unfailingly helpful. In addition to Greg, I'm grateful to
Leslie Hammond, Brian McCarthy, Vince Casey, Pete Abitante, Randall Liu, Dan

Masonson, Steve Alic, Julie Buzzard, and Alexia Gallagher for the help they provided.
I also owe special thanks to Joel Bussert, the NFL's director of player personnel (and

untitled in-house historian), and Jeff Pash, the league's vice president and legal counsel,

whose near-photographic memory rivals Tagliabue's own. Joe Browne, Roger Goodell,

Peter Hadhazy, the late George Young, Mike Pereira, Dennis Lewin, Steve Bornstein,
Hamilton Carothers, and John Beake also walked me through various stages of the
league's operational structure and history.

There were nearly two dozen other sources with whom I consulted repeatedly over

the past five years, and they humored me through countless follow-up questions. The

late Don Weiss and the late Tex Schramm were both crucial, providing crisp reflections

and insights into the game's growth in the ’60s and ’70s. Owners like Lamar Hunt,

Wellington Mara, Dan Rooney, Art Modell, and Bud Adams spoke to me on several
occasions each, demonstrating the institutional memory that helped the league succeed.
The Giants’ Ernie Accorsi, the Chiefs’ Carl Peterson, and the Colts’ Bill Polian provided a

fascinating indoctrination into the game's ultracompetitive modern age, from player
development to cap management. The Falcons’ Rich McKay helped me understand the
environment of the present-day Competition Committee. Bill Walsh, Brian Billick, Tony

Dungy, Dick Vermeil, Gunther Cunningham, Marty Schottenheimer, and Jack Faulkner
all gave eloquent witness to the coaching experience. (I'm especially indebted to Dungy,
who let me visit him in the middle of the pressure-filled 2003 season and spend two
days at his shoulder, which provided a sense of the coaching life far removed from the

loud stadiums and crowded press conferences.) And Jim Brown, Gene Upshaw, Bill
Curry, Pat Summerall, Frank Gifford, Bobby Mitchell, Raymond Berry, Len Dawson, and
the late Tank Younger all helped me better understand the players’ perspective.

At NFL Films, Steve Sabol opened the vaults so I could revisit much of his work over

the past forty years and was consistently helpful in tracking down many of the lost
pieces of the archival puzzle, like a full-color tape of the 1945 NFL championship game.

Equally helpful were communications reps Cory Laslocky, Michelle Valkov, and Patrick
Pantano, as well as director of archives Ace Cacchiotti.

Many people shared not just memories but materials, clippings, documents,

correspondence, and publications. Frank Kasper, one of the NFL's “baby-sitters” during
the war, sent me his fascinating collection of materials. Ed Krzemienski and Tim Brulia

generously shared the fruits of their own research on the life of Joe Namath and the
early years of pro football on TV, respectively. At the NFL Creative Services offices,
John Wiebusch was particularly helpful. Outside the office, Roger Atkin, Dave Gardner,

Herb Weitman, and Carol Boss shared recollections and evidence of the artistry of David

Boss.
I received plenty of help from the PR departments of the key franchises around which

I built this story. The Rams’ Rick Smith has a great memory and managed the best set of

team archives in the league. After Rick retired, Aaron Staenberg ably succeeded him. In

Cleveland, Dino Lucarelli, the head of the thriving alumni relations group for the
Browns, was an invaluable resource, pointing me to the Browns’ wonderful scrapbooks

and putting me in touch with several of the Browns’ legends. Kevin Byrne of the Ravens
arranged numerous interviews, many in the pressing environment of the regular season.

I also received much-needed help from Rich Dalrymple and Brett Daniels in Dallas,
Craig Kelley and Pamela Humphrey in Indianapolis, Al LoCasale in Oakland and Jack
Brennan in Cincinnati. I grew up in Kansas City as a fan of the Chiefs, so I had some

prior knowledge of their history, but Bob Moore of the Chiefs’ PR department shared a
wealth of new material that helped me flesh out the team's early years. He and his staff,

including Pete Morris, Morgan Shaw, and Brad Kuhbander, were unfailingly courteous
and helpful in the midst of my frequent intrusions.

I also received valuable assistance on numerous occasions from Pat Hanlon of the

Giants, the esteemed Lee Remmel of the Packers, Ron Wahl of the Steelers, and Frank

Ramos of the Jets, as well as Dan Edwards of the Jaguars, Greg Bensel of the Saints, Bill

Johnston of the Chargers, Jim Saccomano of the Broncos, Bob Hagen of the Vikings,

Reggie Roberts and later Zack Bolno of the Buccaneers, Kirk Reynolds of the 49ers, and
Scott Berchtold of the Bills.

I also must thank the long-suffering Susie Stephens in Lamar Hunt's office and Kristi

Bailey in Al Davis's office, both of whom I bothered on countless occasions in trying to
set up interviews with those two extremely busy men.

Closer to home, as I tried to gain a more workable understanding of the game, head

coach Larry Kindbom and his staff at Washington University in St. Louis gave me some
insight into the inner workings of football. The chalk talks, film sessions, playbook

reviews, and remedial education provided by Kindbom and his staff (especially former
assistants, Ron Collins, Aaron Keen, Pedro Aruzza) were crucial in helping me gain a
better understanding of the game.

This book would not have gotten off the ground without the keen eye of my agent,

Sloan Harris at ICM, who understood the appeal of the project as well as the challenges
it would face. He helped focus my thinking at the earliest stages and kept me on course

throughout. I'm also grateful to Sloan's previous assistant Teri Steinberg and his present

one, Katharine Cluverius, as well as ICM's John DeLaney, for their frequent help. The
redoubtable Rick Pappas once again provided his much-needed and much-appreciated

counsel.
Ann Godoff and Scott Moyers brought the project to Random House, but left before it

was completed. I was grateful for their initial interest and help. In their place, Dan

Menaker and Webster Younce retained faith in the book through two missed deadlines.
More than anyone, it was Younce who saved me from myself and prevented the

manuscript from attaining the approximate length of Churchill's six-volume history of
World War II. I'm also thankful to Julia Cheiffetz, Younce's assistant; production editor
Steve Messina; managing editor Benjamin Dreyer; designer Caroline Cunningham;

associate production manager Erich Schoeneweiss; and Fred Chase, who copyedited the
manuscript. When Younce left in the spring of 2004, he was succeeded by Mark Tavani,

who in a difficult situation shepherded the book to completion. I'm also grateful to
Mark's assistant, Ingrid Powell, as well as to London King and Annie Klein of the
Random House publicity department.

Over the years, I was aided by a variety of underpaid researchers, including the

invaluable Elizabeth Brewster, who handled the brunt of the transcriptions, as well as
Shekar Sathyanarayana, Mike Wise, Andrew Satter, Chava Mandell, Chris Cramer,
Candice Holliday, Sabrina Lin, Nathan Kleekamp, Ian Cornelius, Jeremy Mikecz, Kate
Ashford, Ken Lee, and George Milkov. The saintly Lesley McCullough was there for the

final year and provided vital work as I finished the manuscript, ranging from
transcribing interviews to helping organize the endnotes to figuring out where in my
basement office I'd misplaced this or that crucial document. Sharon Maslow, Jane Ward,
and Lisa Dohlsein also provided transcription assistance early on.

Much of the early research was conducted at the Pro Football Hall of Fame Archives,

and I'm especially grateful to Joe Horrigan, Pete Fierle, and Saleem Choudhry for their

assistance there. Steve Gietschier at the Sporting News archive in St. Louis was always
helpful during my frequent visits, many on short notice. I spent two weeks, and could

have easily spent two months, at the Library of Congress, whose staff members are

invariably polite and helpful, even with questions they've heard thousands of times
before. I'm also grateful for the assistance offered by David Bowser and the staff at the
University City Public Library; the staff at Olin Library at Washington University in St.
Louis, and the Mid-County Branch of the St. Louis County Library.

In assembling the photographs, I owe special thanks to Neil Leifer, Walter Iooss, Jr.,

Rod Hanna, Vernon and John Biever, Janis E. Rettaliata, Hank Young, Phil Hoffman,
Bill Stover, Jennifer Allen, Cathy Kensil, Jack Landry, Jr., Paul Tepley, Terry McDonell,

Fred Gaudelli, Bob Rosato, Karen Carpenter, Kevin Terrell, Scott Macrillo, Coral Petretti,
Amie Trever, and Rachel Howell.

The project took much longer than I'd originally envisioned, and without the help of

John Walsh and John Skipper, I'm not sure I would have been able to complete it. I will
be forever in their debt.

I received shelter, sustenance, and moral support from a wide array of friends and

family during my frequent cross-country travels, including my mother, Lois
MacCambridge; my sister and brother-in-law, Angie and Tom Szentgyorgyi; my in-laws,

Douglas, David, Danielle, and Dennis Frost, and Dominique and Cliff Parker; Rob
Minter, Brian Hay, Susan Reckers, Joe Pos-nanski, Trey Gratwick, Mike Sutter, Sean and
Elizabeth Porter, Sylvester and Angelia Givens, and Dr. Keith O. Garner. The light was
always on at the home of Greg Emas and his family, where I stayed during my frequent
trips to Kansas City.

Special thanks are owed to Pat Porter, Larry Schwartz, and all the others who read

portions of the early manuscript. I also want to thank all those who wrote with

observations and errors in the first edition, including Bill Murphy, Ken Holloway, Joe
Kane, Robert Benzie, Charlie Ellis, Paul Goldberg, Jim Mooney, Richard Cottone, Bryant

McEvoy, Michael Berger, former NFL lineman Gordon King, Michael Berger, Rich
Dubroff, and Phil Roché. (The errors that made it through are my own. If you see any,
please write me at MacCam-bridge@mac.com so I can make corrections in subsequent
editions of this book.)

I'm also grateful for the help along the way from Arin Paske, Kelly Foster, Heather

Dougherty, Kathy Stephens, Robert Draper, Vahe Gregorian, Cindy Billhartz, Gerald

Early, Michael Hurd, Bill James, Robert W. Creamer, Michael Oh, Brad Garrett, Kevin

Lyttle, Alex Wolff, Russell Smith, Stan Webb, Michael Point, Kirby Moss, Carl Kuebler,
Loren Watt, Hal Cox, Larry Johnson, Robert Humphrey, David Zivan, Kristin Elizondo,

Teri McCarthy, Abe Peck, Chris Brown, Larry Callahan, Todd Jones, Rich Wagner,

Nancy Gates, Joanne Stouwie, Jim Fiala, Ken Bertken, Bob Jacobi, Jr., and Walter
Bernard.

Of course, no one suffers over a long book like a writer's family—and mine paid the

price in numerous ways. I'm eternally grateful for the patience, love, and support of my
wife, Danica Frost, and our children, Miles and Ella. Miles turned five this year and has
been asking me since he was old enough to talk if I was done with my book yet. The
answer, finally, is yes. I think.

MJM
University City, Missouri
August 2004

SOURCE NOTES

ABBREVIATIONS:
PROLOGUE: DECEMBER 28, 1958

ix While the two: Gifford int.; Summerall int.; John Steadman int.; John Steadman, The
Greatest Football Game Ever Played (Stevensville, MD: Press Box, 1988), p. 39. x “We got”:

Unitas int.; Berry int. x With that: Justin Doherty; “The Greatest Game Ever Played?”
unpublished paper, University of Wisconsin, 2000. xi “What happens now?”: Summerall int. on

The NFVs Greatest Games: ‘58 Championship, NFL Films, 1998. xi Up in the booth: Schenkel int.
xi “John!” yelled Weeb Ewbank: Unitas int.; Steadman, The Greatest Football Game Ever

Played, p. 12. xii And in that: Chicago Tribune Press Service, “Play-by-Play Story of 80 Yard

Drive to Title by Colts,” Chicago Tribune, Dec. 29, 1958. xii The rocking: Unitas int. xii Moments
later: Chris Schenkel int.; Curt Smith, Of Mikes and Men: From Ray Scott to Curt Gowdy: Broadcast
Tales from the Pro Football Booth (South Bend, IN: Diamond, 1998), p. 64. xiii When NBC got:
Play-by-play accounts of the game vary. The most complete version appears in John Steadman's

The Greatest Football Game Ever Played. There's also an annotated version of Unitas's final drive in
both The Pro Football Chronicle, by Dan Daly and Bob O'Donnell, and Tex Maule's follow-up piece

about the game in the January 19, 1959, issue of Sports Illustrated. Even here, there's little

consensus. Steadman shows Ameche's key overtime run going for 22 yards, from the Giant 42 to
the 20. Maule has it as a 23-yard carry, from the 43 to the 20. Daly and O'Donnell show it as a
23-yard carry, but they have it going from the 44 to the 21. Steadman, The Greatest Football Game

Ever Played, pp. 132-37; Dan Daly and Bob O'Donnell, The Pro Football Chronicle (New York:

Macmillan, 1990), pp. 159-60; Tex Maule, “The Best Game Ever Played,” Sports Illustrated, Jan.
5,1959;

Tex Maule, “Here's Why It Was the Best Football Game Ever” Sports Illustrated, Jan 19, 1959.

xiii “What if”: Steadman, The Greatest Football Game Ever Played, p. 66.
xiv “Whoever wants”: John Bartlett and Justin Kaplan, Bartletfs Familiar Quotations (Boston:

Little, Brown, 1992), p. 721.

xiv Indeed, it was: Michener int.
xiv By the early: David Harris, The League: The Rise and Decline of the NFL (New York: Bantam,

1986), p. 5.

xvi More than any: Arthur J. Donovan and Bob Drury, Fatso: Football When Men Were Really

Men (New York: Morrow, 1987), p. 27.
1: GOING WEST

Compact and slender: Reeves probably got the “Irish dividends” expression from previous

owner Homer Marshman, who was quoted using it in Hal Lebovitz's introduction to Joseph

Hession's Rams: Five Decades of Football (San Francisco: Foghorn, 1987), p. 13; Susan Reeves int.;
Jack Teele int.; “Bob Waterfield: Actress Jane Russell's Husband Is 1945 ‘Pro’ Football Star,” Life,
Dec. 17, 1945; Leonard Maltin, Leonard Maltiris 2003 Movie and Video Guide (New York: Penguin
Putnam, 2003), p. 1041.

Six days before the game: Two days before the game, the Cleveland News reported

representatives of the Rams and the city “were going slightly berserk attempting to get the

Stadium in condition for Sunday's championship.” Howard Preston, “Snow and Straw Dept.:

Rams Corner Both at Stadium,” Cleveland News, Dec. 12, 1945; “Rams, City Berserk Over ‘Snow
Bowl,’” Cleveland News, Dec. 14, 1945; John Dietrich, “Snow Won't Halt Title Game,” Cleveland

Plain Dealer, Dec. 12, 1945; Herman Goldstein, “Relief from December Playoff Unlikely; Owners
Still Insist on Home Schedules,” Cleveland News, Dec. 18, 1945.

On Sunday morning: Arthur Daley, “Sports of the Times: Short Shots in Sundry Directions,”

NYT, Dec. 14, 1945; AP, “Cleveland Looks for Record Crowd,” NYT, Dec. 14, 1945; “Cleveland 8-

5 Choice Over Redskins in Pro Football Final Today,” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Dec. 16, 1945;
William D. Richardson, “Redskins and Rams in Top Shape Today for Pro Play-off,” NYT, Dec. 16,
1945; AP, “77,000 May Watch Pro Title Contest,” NYT, Dec. 15, 1945.

Cleveland Stadium: Manny Eisner int.; Ed Bang column, “Between You and Me,” Cleveland

News, Dec. 17, 1945; Franklin Lewis, “Bits and Bites of Sports Chosen and Chewed,” Cleveland
Press, Dec. 17, 1945.

In financial terms: Lewis, “Bits and Bites of Sports Chosen and Chewed.”
NFL commissioner Elmer Layden: The NFL's championship trophy had obscure roots. Ed

Thorp was a longtime assistant to the president of A.G. Spalding & Brothers, a recognized

authority on playing rules, and one of the best-known referees in the country, working both the
1925 and 1934 Rose Bowl games. A week after he died of a cerebral hemorrhage in 1934, Eagles

owner Bert Bell moved that the NFL create a permanent trophy in his name. Beginning at the end
of the ‘34 season, the “Ed Thorpe Memorial Trophy” was given to the NFL's reigning champion.

Joel Bussert int.; “Ed Thorp,” National Football League press release; John Wiebusch, “A Long
Winter's Day,” More Than a Game (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1974), p. 125.

Its next president: Carroll et al., Total Football II (New York: HarperCollins, 1999), p. 99;

George Halas, Gwen Morgan, and Arthur Veysey, Halas (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1979), pp. 7277.

For most of: Dan Rooney int.; William Henry Paul, The Gray-Flannel Pigskin: Movers and

Shakers of Pro Football (Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1974), p. 258.

“So in December 1936”: Hal Lebovitz, “Introduction,” in Joseph Hession, Rams: Five Decades

of Football (San Francisco: Foghorn, 1987), p. 12.

After Carr's death: Dan Daly and Bob O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle (New York: Collier,

2000), p. 83; George Strickler letter, PFHOF; Don Pierson int.

9 Storck's resignation: George Strickler letter, PFHOF; TSN, Nov. 19, 1942. 9 Layden was

well regarded: Robert Peterson, Pigskin: The Early Years of Pro Football (New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997), p. 137; Elmer Layden and Ed Snyder, It Was a Different Game: The Elmer

Layden Story (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1969), p. 146; Daly and O'Donnell, Pro Football
Chronicle, p. 66. 10 The son of: Dan Rooney int.; Jack Teele int.

10 The final Sunday: Curt Smith, Of Mikes and Men: From Ray Scott to Curt Gowdy: Broadcast

Tales from the Pro Football Booth (South Bend, IN: Diamond Communications), p. 32.

On that Sunday: Richard Goldstein, “Football Sunday, Dec. 7, 1941: Suddenly the Games

Didn't Matter,” NYT, Dec. 7,1980.

“I honestly feel”: William Mead, Baseball Goes to War (Washington, D.C.: Farragut, 1985), p.

35.

11 And although it:TSN, Dec. 11,1945.
As the nation rallied: Peterson, Pigskin, p. 138.
But the manpower: Walter McCallum, “Clubs Are Sliced to 25 Men Over Skins’ Protest,”

Washington Star, Apr. 9, 1943; Walter McCallum, “Win, Lose or Draw,” Washington Star, Apr.
10,1943; John Steadman int.; JohnSteadman, “It Hit Sports Like a Bomb, Too? Baltimore Evening
Sun, Dec. 6, 1991; Halas et ai., Halas, p. 215.

12 The owners: Thomas B. Littlewood, Arch: A Promoter, Not a Poet: The Story of Arch Ward

(Ames, IA: State University Press, 1990), pp. 150-51; William A. Hachten, “A Rookie with the
New York Giants,” unpublished manuscript, Nov. 1998; John Steadman int.; Ernie Accorsi int.

12 So the league fought: Layden, It Was a Different Game, p. 151; “One-Armed Marine to Play

for Eagles While Receiving Medical Care Here,” Philadelphia Inquirer, undated; Hall of Fame

papers; NFL news release, June 2, 1994; Ted Patterson, Football in Baltimore: History and
Memorabilia (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press), p. 55.

For all that:Official 2003 National Football League Record and Fact Book (New York: National

Football League, 2003), p. 598.

“We owners”: Halas et al., Halas, p. 233.
13 On June 4,1944: Littlewood, Arch, pp. 153-56.
13 At first: Joe Hendrickson, “Pro Football War,” Esquire, p. 46, August 1945.
But the AAFC's: 1947 All-America Conference Record Manual (St. Louis: Sporting News, 1947),

p. 24.

When the Tribune: Chicago Tribune, Apr. 21, 1945.
The off-the-cuff Layden, It Was a Different Game, p. 154.
TheNFL's: Daly and O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle, pp. 27-28; Layden, It Was a Different

Game, pp. 165-67.

15 “Layden was forced out”: George Strickler letter to Don Pierson, Nov. 17,1974, PFHOF.

15 For their new: Bell int. Harold “Spike” Claassen, The History of Professional Football: Its
Great Teams, Games, Players and Coaches (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1963) pp.
93-94; Minutes from National Football League Annual Meetings, Jan. 11-12,1946.

Then it was time: AP, “National Pro League Backs Champs’ Shift,” Jan. 13, 1946; Robert L.

Burnes, “The Bench Warmer,” St. Louis Globe-Democrat, Feb. 25,1946.

Eight votes: Unsigned press release, “Dan Reeves Moves West—Hall of Fame Report,” PFHOF.
16 “If that's your”: Ibid.
16 This wasn't the first time: Nineteen forty-six NFL meeting minutes; Harold Claassen, The

History of Professional Football (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1963), pp. 206-7.

16 As Reeves left:“It's not that I love Cleveland less,” Reeves explained, “but that I love Los

Angeles more.” “Quotes,” Los Angeles Examiner, Jan. 15,1946. Reeves had visited Los Angeles in

1937, and seen a burgeoning metropolis full of transplanted Easterners who were as sports-mad

as fans in New York. “I've wanted to go out there ever since,” he said, “and the current move is
the product of long-range planning and the culmination of seven years of trying.” AP, “National
Pro League Backs Champs’ Shift,” Chicago Tribune, Jan. 13, 1946.

The NFL's record book: This was the disastrous year in which the league was at twenty-two

teams, only to quickly contract to twelve the following season, and ten the year after; Carroll,
Total Football II, p. 105.

When Coliseum Commission chairman: Herman Hill, “Hill's Side,” Pittsburgh Courier, Mar.

30,1946.

Few players: Obituaries, TSN, July 10, 1971; Thomas G. Smith, “Outside the Pale,” The Coffin

Corner, Vol. 11, No. 4, originally published in The Journal of Sport History.

Jackie Robinson: Mike Rathet and Don Smith, The Pro Football Hall of Fame Presents: Their

Deeds and Dogged Faith (New York: Routledge, 1984), p. 210.

18 Despite the acclaim: Smith, “Outside the Pale.” 18 When he traveled: Ibid.
18 Afterthegame: Obituaries, TSN, July 10, 1971; Woody Strode, Goal Dust: An Autobiography

(Lanham, MD: Madison, 1990), p. 134. 18 So whenRoach: Herman Hill, “Hill's Side,”Pittsburgh
Courier, Mar. 30, 1946.

“Well, fellows”: Ibid.
As Harding sat down:“Pro Grid Champs Say They Want Buddy Young,” Pittsburgh Courier,

Jan. 26,1946.

19 “Kenny Washington”: Herman Hill, “Hill's Side,” Pittsburgh Courier, Mar. 30, 1946;

minutes from Los Angeles Coliseum Commission meeting, Jan. 29, 1946.
And so on May4: Strode, Goal Dust, p. 214.

That summer: Vincent X. Flaherty column, “Owner of Rams Comes to California to Stay,”

LÄT, July 14,1946.

20 “That kid”: Schramm int.
2: THE ORGANIZATION MAN
21 Standing in front of the classroom:“Columbus Still Shows Interest in Paul Brown,”

Cleveland News, Aug. 1, 1946; Dino Lucarelli int.

21 His voice: Jack Clary, Great Teams Great Years: Cleveland Browns (New York: Macmillan,

1973), pp. 20, 32-33.

“We will be”: William V Levy, Return to Glory: The Story of the Cleveland Browns (Cleveland:

World, 1965), p. 62.

Later that morning: Hal Lebovitz, “I'll Never Forget…: The Right Way… and the Brown

Way,” Pro Magazine!, 1980 season.

“I want this team”: Arthur Daley, “A Rather Robust Darling,” Sports of the Times, NYT, Nov.

21,1948; Levy, Return to Glory, pp. 62-63.

Massillon, Ohio, lay: Michael Barone and Grant Ujifusa, The Almanac of American Politics

(Washington, D.C.: Times Books, 2000), p. 1289.

23 Young Paul Brown: Paul Brown and Jack Clary, PB, The Paul Brown Story (New York:

Atheneum, 1979), pp. 23-29; “Brown'll Remember the Kids,” Cleveland News, May 5,1945; Tex
Maule, “A Man for This Season,” SI, Sep. 10,1962.

“He was like a banty rooster”: Levy, Return to Glory, p. 44; Al Ostrow, “They Even Named

the Team After Paul Brown,” St Louis Post-Dispatch, Nov. 6,1959.
There were rumors: Dawson int.
24 One key to: After losses in each of his first three seasons to archrival Canton McKinley,

Brown's Massillon Tigers beat Canton the next six seasons, compiling a record of 58-1-1 in that
span. Tommy Devine, “Fans in the Huddle,” PIC magazine, undated.

24 “YouVe got to have”: Arthur Daley, “A Rather Robust Darling,” Sports of the Times, NYT,

Nov. 21, 1948.

He also developed: Mickey Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football: NFL Football in the

1950s (Dallas: Taylor, 1990), p. 141; Maule, “A Man for This Season.”

In the‘30s: Robert Smith, Pro Football: The History of the Game and the Great Players (Garden

City, NY: Doubleday, 1963), p. 100.

The T helped to civilize: In its complexity, but also its brutality, the game served as an

obvious analogue to war itself. The comparison hadn't been lost on football coaches. During
World War II, Shaughnessy published a magazine-length article titled “Football in Time of War,”
in which he compared the charge of General Montgomery's British Eighth Army troops at El

Alamein to a key play in the T formation series. “At El Alamein,” wrote Shaughnessy, “the feint
to the left by General Montgomery and his threat to the middle of the line prevented the

Germans from shifting enough power to Montgomery's right to stop the onslaught of the
British…. In football the play is called a fullback counter.” Clark Shaughnessy and Esquire, Inc.,
Football in War and Peace (Clinton, SC: Jacobs Press, 1943) pp. 4-5; Edwin Pope, Football's
Greatest Coaches (Atlanta: Tupper and Love, 1955), pp. 224-25.

While Halas:“Paul Brown Lays Plans for Cleveland Pro Club,” Chicago Sun, Apr. 9, 1945.
Brown was still: Clary, Great Teams Great Years: Cleveland Browns, pp. 13-21; Brown, PB, p.

124.

Once Graham was signed: Graham int.; Lavelli int.
In the Philippines: Brown and Clary, PB, p. 125.
“Ohio State is counting”: UPI, “Avers Attempt to Wreck Athletic Department,” Cleveland

Press, Feb. 9, 1946.

28 “Keep in mind”: AP, “Brown Hits Back at Criticism by St. John,” Cleveland Plain Dealer,

Feb. 9, 1946. 28 With the Rams’: Eisner int. 28 “Regardless of”:“First Order: Browns Warned

to Be Lean and Hungry,” Cleveland News, May 29,1946. 28 To help him: Bob Yonkers, “Three
Cleveland Rookies Given Chance to Stick with Browns as Camp Opens,” Cleveland Press, July 29,
1946; Kay Collier Slone, FootbalVs Gentle Giant:

The Blanton Collier Story (Lexington, KY: Life Force Press, 1985), pp. 160-61.

At Bowling Green:“Columbus Still Shows Interest in Paul Brown,” Cleveland News, Aug. 1,

1946.

On the third day of practice:“Brown Passes Out First Play—It Goes Off Tackle,” Cleveland

News, Aug. 1,1946.

29 Brown drew from: Mike Brown int.
29 “There was a total”: Clary, The Gamemakers, p. 21.
29 Willis was preparing: Bob Yonkers, “Willis Tries Out with Browns, May Open Way for

Negro Players in All-America,” Cleveland Press, Aug. 6,1946.

30 Later in the month: Clary, Great Teams Great Years: Cleveland Browns, p. 23. 30 Brown

later claimed: Brown and Clary, PB, p. 129.

30 As Dan Daly: Daly and O'Donnell, The Pro Football Chronicle, p. 119. 30 Brown never

informed: Herskowitz int.; Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football, p. 141.

With the last two key players: Fifteen of his players were Ohioans, and nearly all had played

either for or against Brown at some point in his coaching career. “Brown Ohio,” Newsweek, Dec.
30, 1946; Peterson, Pigskin, p. 155.

During the Rams:“Meat, Homes, Trucks, Girls, Etc.,” Cleveland Press, July 15, 1946.
31 “About $10,000 worth”: Powers quoted in Bill Leiser, “Browns Really Did Things Up

Brown,” San Francisco Chronicle, Sep. 8,1946.

31 The Browns outclassed their opposition: Ron Smith, Cleveland Browns: The Official

Illustrated History (St. Louis: Sporting News, 1999), p. 37.

Dons coach Dudley DeGroot:“The Big Difference—Motley,” Cleveland News, Oct. 21, 1946.
“There were times in games”: Ira Berkow, “The Kicker Changed the Game” NYT, Dec. 10,

2000.

“That kind of crap”: Stuart Leuthner, Iron Men: Bucko, Crazylegs, and the Boys Recall the

Golden Days of Professional Football (New York: Doubleday, 1988), p. 233.

33 The team's organizational: Ray Didinger, “A Remembrance of Paul Brown,” in A Game of
Passion: The NFL Literary Companion, John Wiebusch and Brian Silverman, eds., (Atlanta:

Turner, 1994), p. 242. 33 While Conkright's analysis: Herman Goldstein, “Some Little Things
That Made Browns Big,” Cleveland News, Dec. 16,1946. 33 Cleveland's practices: Arthur Daley,

“A Rather Robust Darling,” Sports of the Times, NYT, Nov. 21,1948. 33 “A coach who
scrimmages”: Jack Newcombe, “Paul Brown: Football's Licensed Genius,”
Sport, Dec. 1954.
As in training camp: In the area of spouses, Brown's attention to detail was acute and

unflagging. He ordered the tickets for players’ wives and girlfriends separated, figuring that if

they sat together, they would only trade gossip and foment resentment. Otto Graham int.;
Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football, p. 54.

During the season: Newcombe, “Paul Brown: Football's Licensed Genius.”
34 “This is a business trip”: Bill Walsh, “Paul Brown: 60 Years of Quiet, Innovative Football,”
NYT, Aug. 11,1991. 34 On game days: Lou Groza int. 34 After the team: Natali, Brown's

Town, p. 55. 34 “Is what I read”: Ibid.

34 “We were a young team”: Terry Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town: Cleveland's

Browns and the Championship Season of’64 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997), p. 24.

35 The game itself:“Browns Get $931 Each for Title Game,” Cleveland Press, Dec. 20,1946. 35

Afterward, Brown: Howard Preston, “Pro Title Completes the Grid Cycle for Paul Brown,”

Cleveland News, Dec. 23, 1946. 35 After the season: Slone, Football's Gentle Giant, p. 24; Jack

Ryan, “Football Has Gone Scientific,” Pro Football Illustrated, 1947.
Collier's job: Ibid.
One example: Ibid.
36 As in every other industry: Spadia int.

“You must earn morale”: Paul Brown, “Building Morale on a Football Squad,” notes from

speech given at coaching clinic; Weeb Ewbank papers, University of Miami, Ohio.
“We're getting”: Ryan, “Football Has Gone Scientific.”
3: “LET BERT DO IT”

“His mission in life”: Phil Musick, “A Football Man,” in A Game of Passion, Wiebusch and

Silverman, eds., p. 324.

With the ten-team league: Carroll et al., Total Football II, pp. 1751-1755; Manny Eisner int.
39 The issue was: Paul, The Gray-Flannel Pigskin, p. 258.
39 “The owners who had”: Ray Didinger, Great Teams Great Years: Pittsburgh Steelers (New

York: Macmillan, 1974), p. 120.

So owners learned: Minutes from National Football League meetings, PFHOF.
“The schedules would always”: Musick, “A Football Man,” in A Game of Passion, Wiebusch

and Silverman, eds., p. 324.

40 “Weak teams should play”: Untitled Bert Bell profile, undated, PFHOF.
Each off-season: Bell int.; Ed Pollock, “Bert Bell Plays Dominoes, Trying to Chart Pro Games,”

TSN, Jan. 18, 1950.

For weeks on end: Bell int.; Mike Rathet, “The Domino Theory,” Petersen's 1972 Pro Football

Annual, p. 81.

41 His son Upton: Upton Bell with David Chanoff, “Any Given Sunday,” Philadelphia

Magazine, Sep. 2000.

41 Those in Bell's social circle: Steadman int.; Bell int.; Les Biederman, “His Name's de Ben-

neville but Otherwise He's Tough,” publication unknown, Jan. 17,1946.

41 “If you don't think”: Harvey Pollack, “Bell of the NFL,” Sportfolio, Jan. 1948, p. 87.
“He'll go to Penn”: Bert Bell, Jr., int; Louis Effrat, “Bell's Decisions Keep Pro Football Family

Happy, Rich,” NYT, Dec. 30, 1956.

Bell started at: Anthony DiMarco, The Big Bowl Football Guide (New York: Putnam, 1976), p.

17; Bert Bell, Jr., int.; Pennsylvania Gazette, Vol. 17, May 9, 1919, pp. 729-33, University Archives
and Record Center, University of Pennsylvania; Current Biography (New York: H. W. Wilson,
1950), p. 34.

42 After a series of financial setbacks: Bert Bell, Jr., int.
The previous summer: The Frankford Yellow Jackets, located on the outskirts of Philadelphia,

had fallen victim to the Depression, inferior facilities, and the Pennsylvania blue laws, which

prevented them from playing home games on Sunday. They were helped in November of that
year when, as expected, Pennsylvania voters repealed the blue laws prohibiting Sunday sports

events. Five days after the law was passed, the Eagles played their first Sunday home game. Bert
Bell, Jr., int.; John Steadman int.

Walking along the Jersey shore: John Steadman, “Memories of Bell Burn Bright,” TSN, Oct.

25,1975; Bell with Chanoff, “Any Given Sunday.”

43 The Eagles were: Tod Maher and Bob Gill, The Pro Football Encyclopedia: The Complete and

Definitive Record of Professional Football, 3rd ed. (New York: Macmillan, 1997), p. 192.

43 Bell had been particularly discouraged: The University of Minnesota media guide has

Kostka lettering in 1935, but Total Football II shows him playing in the NFL for Brooklyn in 1935.
AP, “Back's Refusal to Sign Led to Grid Draft,” Green Bay Gazette, Jan. 30, 1957.

“Gentlemen, I've always had”: Arthur Daley, “Bell's Monument,” NYT, Feb. 1,1973.
“People come to see”: Halas et aì., Halas, p. 158.
“Bert was a guy”: Not-for-attribution int.
45 Historian Bob Carroll: It became even more convoluted in 1943, when the Steelers and

Eagles merged into the Steagles during the war. Bob Carroll, “How to Get from Dayton to
Indianapolis by Way of Brooklyn, Boston, New York, Dallas, Hershey and Baltimore,” The Coffin
Corner, Vol. 17.

45 Asked about the deal years later: Musick, “A Football Man,” in A Game of Passion,

Wiebusch and Silverman, eds., p. 321.

“People in Pittsburgh”: Ed Prell, “Bell Makes Believers out of Grid Magnates and Fans,” TSN,

Jan. 31,1951.

“Those guys”: Rooney int.
46 “Pro football has”: Peterson, Pigskin, p. 147.
More than 16 million: James Patterson, Grand Expectations: The United States, 1945-1974

(New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 11,13-14, 61, 68.
Upon taking the job: Pollack, “Bell of the NFL.”

47 The challenge oftheAAFC: Littlewood, Arc/z, pp. 148-68. 47 The AAFC possessed:

Peterson, Pigskin, p. 148.

49 Bell's action was decisive: Daly and O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle, p. 110.; Layden, It

Was a Different Game, p. 152.

Bell was convinced: Bell would continue, throughout his tenure, to serve as a sort of public

advocate, railing against the dangers of idle gossip. In The Saturday Evening Post in 1948, he
wrote an article titled, “Do the Gamblers Make a Sucker Out of You?” which opened with an
apocalyptic comparison: “I wouldn't know whether any of the nations in World War II had a
poison gas in reserve that would feed upon itself if released, thereby growing more deadly and
denser the farther it spread. I do know that football and all other big-gate sports are threatened
by such a gas…. Its real name is Rumor. It's the most effective weapon the football gamblers

have.” AP, “Hapes and Filchock Barred Indefinitely by National League,” NYT, Apr. 4,1947; Bert

Bell with Pete Martin, “Do the Gamblers Make a Sucker Out of You?” Saturday Evening Post, Nov.
6, 1948.

Having won: Patterson, Football in Baltimore, p. 60.; Phil Barber, “The All-America Football

Conference,” in Total Football II, pp. 527-30; Littlewood, Arch, pp. 132-34.
50 Ward biographer: Littlewood, Arch, p. 172.

Throughout the 1947 and 1948 seasons: Spadia int.; Maxwell Stiles, “LA Rams Told to Quit

at Pro Peace Session” TSN, Oct. 26,1949.; Littlewood, Arch, p. 173.

“There's a bus outside”: Hal Lebovitz, “I'll Never Forget…: The right way… and the Brown

way.”

By this time: Eisner int.; Lavelli int.; Graham int.; Cleveland Browns 2004 media guide.
Finally, in December 1949:“It's Wonderful,” Time, Dec. 19, 1949. 52 Brown would

remember: Brown and Clary, PB, p. 193.

For all the discussion: David Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered: A Life of Vince Lombardi

(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999), p. 105.

In 1948, the Eagles: East West Sporting Club, Inc., balance sheet, Dec. 31, 1948, PFHOF

archives.
The Bears’ income: Halas et al., Halas, p. 227.
54 “Who wants chicken sandwiches?”: John Steadman int.; John Steadman, “Memories of

Bell Burn Bright,” TSN, Oct. 25, 1975.
4: GOING DEEP

55 Inside the dimly lit: Tank Younger int.; Collie Nicholson int.; Eddie Robinson int. 57 So

complete was: Younger int.; Nicholson int.

57 “You have to let”: Michael Hurd, “The BV Q&A: Tanks for the Memories,” Black Voices

Quarterly, Fall 2000.

57 The success of: While attending Georgetown in the late ‘20s, Reeves became impressed

with an unheralded halfback from West Virginia Wesleyan, and recommended him to his older

brother Eddie, then a minority owner of the Boston Redskins. The halfback's name was Cliff
Battles, and he went on to become one of the league's biggest stars, leading the league in rushing
in 1932. Bob St. John, Tex! The Man Who Built the Dallas Cowboys (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1988), p. 164.

After hiring Kotal: Cliff Christi and Don Langenkamp, Sleepers, Busts and Franchise-Makers: The

Behind-the-Scenes Story of the Pro Football Draft (Seattle: Preview Publishing, 1983); not-forattribution int.

Meanwhile, the club: St. John, Tex!, p. 174.
At the same: Chuck Benedict, “Pro Scouting: A Contest of Science, Luck and Wits,” Peterseris

Pro Football 1962.

Facing a fifth season: Hamilton Maule, The Game: The Official Picture History of the NFL

andAFL (New York: Random House, 1967), pp. 130-31.
59 Even as the losses: Schramm int.

59 Through a friend: Peter Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes: The Definitive

Oral History of America's Team (New York: Warner, 1997), p. 29.
The young Tex Schramm: St. John, Tex!, p. 242.

Reeves invited Schramm: Marty Schramm letter to author; St. John, Tex!, pp. 54-55.
60 Schramm's assignment: Schramm int.; 1948 Rams game programs, St. Louis Rams

archives.

By 1949: Schramm int.; Michael MacCambridge, The Franchise: A History of Sports Illustrated

Magazine (New York: Hyperion, 1997), p. 58.

Then, too, there were instances: Schramm int.; Gehrke int.; St. John, Tex!, p. 172.
Dan Reeves loved: Mickey Herskowitz, “Different Strokes,” Pro! Magazine, undated.

Throughout the ‘40s: Tom Bennett, “By Football Possessed,” Pro! Magazine, undated. 62 After

stops: Pope, Football's Greatest Coaches, pp. 223-230.

As the tactics:“I always looked upon Clark Shaughnessy as a Henry Wallace with brains,”

mused football writer Roger Treat after Shaughnessy went to the NFL. “A conscientious idealist
who might better have followed the trail of Father Flanagan. He may never be entirely happy in
the jovial thuggery of pro football, where every man has a little assassin in him.” Ibid.

Back at Grambling: Nicholson int.; Eddie Robinson int. Nicholson recalled seeing the headline

“A Star Is Born” but the Rams’ own meticulously kept scrapbooks contained no sign of such a
headline that summer. The line quoted appeared in the Los Angeles Times story, Sep. 12,1949,

with the headline “Ram Eleven in Omaha for Giant Game,” 1949 team scrapbook, St. Louis Rams
archives. 63 Younger lived up: Younger int.

Shaughnessy's 1949 team: Younger int., Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football, p. 113.
“The worst team”: In his biography of Arch Ward, Thomas B. Littlewood notes that Marshall

had stated on several occasions that “our weakest teams could toy with the Browns.” Littlewood,
Arch, p. 177.

As the teams headed: Dan Rooneyint.
In the opener, the Browns: Groza int.; Lavelli int.
65 When Cleveland got the ball again: Paul Brown, “This Was My Best,” Miami Herald, Mar.

15, 1957.

65 Surreptitiously, the Browns: Groza int.; Clary, Great Teams GreatYears: Cleveland Browns,

pp. 54-63.

66 After the game, Neale: Clary, Great Teams Great Years: Cleveland Browns, pp. 34, 63. 66

Bert Bell entered: Ibid., p. 63.

For the rest:“The Sporting Scene: Coach,” The New Yorker, Dec. 16, 1974.
The loss to: Howard Roberts, The Story of Pro Football (Chicago: Rand McNally, 1953), pp.

115-16.

67 To those closest to: Younger int.; Schramm int.
67 Stydahar was a player's: Leuthner, Iron Men, p. 160; Maule, The Game, p. 135.
67 Reeves's other major: Jeff Neal-Lunsford, “Sport in the Land of Television,” Journal of
Sport History, Spring 1992, p. 61. 67 Gillette had been: Ibid., pp. 62-63.
The format of boxing: The historian Jeff Neal-Lunsford called boxing the perfect sport for the

nascent days of television: “Broadcasting equipment of the time was bulky and difficult to

maneuver. Television cameras needed large amounts of light in order to produce a watchable
picture, and picture clarity was a problem even under good conditions—long shots of objects

tended to reduce those objects to unidentifiable specks. The Cavalcade solved these problems and

made television engineers happy by televising boxing matches. Boxing lent itself to the existing
state of television technology because it took place in a small indoor arena which could be
provided with the large amount of light needed by the cameras.” Ibid., p. 61.

The popularity: Benjamin G. Rader, In Its Own Image: How Television Has Transformed Sports

(New York: Free Press, 1984), p. 41.

68 The makers of Gillette: Neal-Lunsford, “Sport in the Land of Television,” pp. 59-60.
68 In a postwar boom: Reader's Digest, America in the ‘40s: A Sentimental Journey

(Pleasantville, NY: Reader's Digest Association, 1998), p. 114. 68 Sales still lagged: Neal-

Lunsford, “Sport in the Land of Television,” p. 65. 68 While boxing was: William Johnson, Super
Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians (Boston: Little, Brown, 1971), p. 100. 68 And if television:
Ibid., p. 99.

All this would: Neal-Lunsford, “Sport in the Land of Television,” pp. 72-73; Didinger, “A

Remembrance of Paul Brown,” in A Game of Passion, Wiebusch and Silverman, eds., pp. 251-52.
By the end of the 1950 season: Accorsi int., Gehrke int.; Schramm int.
No conclusion could be reached: Schramm int.; Halas et al., Halas, p. 247.

“It was the lowest moment”: Didinger, “A Remembrance of Paul Brown,” in A Game of

Passion, Wiebusch and Silverman, eds., pp. 243-44.

As he reached the sideline: Graham int.; Brown and Clary, PB, p. 211.
71 “It was terrible”: Shelby Strother, NFL Top 40: The Greatest Pro Football Games Ever Played

(NewYork: Viking, 1988), p.41.

71 It was the game: AP, “Title Contest Worth $1,116,” NYT, Dec. 25,1950.
And when he found Brown: Brown and Clary, PB, p. 212.
“Sometimes, it's hell…”: Obituaries, TSN, July 10, 1971; Smith, “Outside the Pale.” 72

Similar events were occurring: Spadia int.
But by the early ‘50s: Early int.
As the teams: Schramm int.

73 The game was: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 70.
73 The DuMont network: Although one confidential NFL document reported that the fee was

just $75,000; Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football, p. 40; St. John, Tex!, p. 190.

Greeted with: Bert Bell, Jr., int.; Val Pinchbeck, “NFL Television History,” internal league

document, 1998.

Television riches did not: The next few years would be spent in a piecemeal series of local

arrangements, little discussed and less documented. As the historian Richard Keller has written,

“Not even God knows much about televised sport during the 1950’s.” Richard Keller, “Sport and
Television in the 1950’s: A Preliminary Survey,” Emporia State University, 1982.
5: BALTIMORE
75 “There has been a lot”: The editorial went on to place much of the blame for the league's
troubles on the “brutally oppressive ‘slave law1 governing the drafting of new players.” “Pro
Football's ‘Slave Law’ Ought to Go,” Time Out with the Staff, Sport, Oct. 1952.

75 When the NFL and the AAFC: Bert Bell, Jr., int.; Phil Barber, “The All-America Football

Conference,” in Carroll et al., Total Football II, p. 530.

76 Somehow, the dismal Colts: Patterson, Football in Baltimore, pp. 84-85. 76 “series of

underground bungalows”: Ibid., p. 86.

76 “I will underwrite”: Comic book Baltimore Colts, published by American Visuals

Corporation, 1950, p. 3.

76 But after another:“There were a lot of unemployed football players out there looking for

work,” recalled Art Donovan, “and about 90 percent of them seemed to be in the Colts camp

kicking the living shit out of each other … and all we did was scrimmage. No drills. No chalk
talk.” Donovan and Drury, Fatso, pp. 119-20.

76 A year later:“All we want is a football team,” explained the animated Baltimore lawyer

William D. Macmillan, who spearheaded the efforts of the city to regain a franchise. “Fans can't

come out to the Stadium to watch us count a cash settlement. It's a team we're after.” John
Steadman, The Baltimore Colts Story (Baltimore: Press Box, 1958), p. 62.
Into the picture: Daly and O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle, p. 131.
None of those ideas were realized: John Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days: Growing Up with Dallas

and the Cowboys in the 1960s (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997), pp. 20-22.

77 Shortly after arriving: Mickey Herskowitz, “Once Upon a Time in Dallas …” from More

Than a Game, John Weisbuch, ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1974), pp. 96-99); Tex
Maule, “The Late, Unlamented Dallas Texans,” Pro! Magazine, 1980; Stan Grosshan-dler, “A
Disgrace,” The Coffin Corner, Vol. 4,1982; George Young int.

77 Practices were barely organized: Donovan and Drury, Fatso, p. 134.
77 The Texans’ season opened: Jack Horrigan, “Belly Up in Dallas,” The Coffin Corner, Vol. 7,

1985.

In the following weeks: Shrake int.
Prior to the game: Schramm int.; Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes, pp. 17-18.
78 And so it ended: There was a last-minute rescue attempt by Dallas oilman Clint Murchi-

son, Jr., but he was vacationing in South America during the week of the Millers’ capitulation,

and Bell declined to wait for him to return. Herskowitz, “Once Upon a Time in Dallas….”
78 While trying: John Steadman int.; George Young int.; Patterson, Football in Baltimore, pp.
93-99. 78 Sensinga settlement: Herskowitz, “Once Upon a Time in Dallas….” 78 Though

Baltimore had: Patterson, Football in Baltimore, p. 97.

But Bell kept leaning: Bell even produced a sheet of estimated expenses, which factored in

$210,000 for team salaries, $27,000 for the coaching staff, $2,000 for a team doctor and all
doctor's bills, $900 for press meeting lunches and press box. Figuring $50,000 per game of ticket

receipts—money at that point that was literally already in the bank—Bell estimated a first-year
profit of just over $33,000. Baltimore estimated expenses, National Football Hall of Fame library.
Bell finally settled: Bell, Jr., int.; John Steadman int.; Maule, The Game, p. 50.
79 The sales terms: William Gildea, When the Colts Belonged to Baltimore: A Father and a Son, a

Team and a Time (New York: Ticknor & Fields, 1994), p. 107; Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro
Football, p. 179.

79 Instead of the old: Patterson, Football in Baltimore, p. 102.
79 Paul Brown was in: Mike Brown int.; Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football, p. 35.
Yet beneath the surface: Ibid., pp. 101,104.
It was the mind-set: Ibid., p. 101.
80 In the title game: Shelby Strother, NFVs Top 40: The Greatest Pro Football Games Ever
Played (New York: Viking, 1988), pp. 42-45. 80 Brown, still coping: Herskowitz, The Golden

Age of Pro Football, p. 180. 80 After a conflicted Collier: Patterson, Football in Baltimore, p. 107.

When he was first:“Paul liked to control everything,” said Ewbank later. “I do mean

everything! And that included his assistant coaches. He didn't like somebody to leave until he

was ready to let him go.” Paul Zimmerman, The Last Season of Weeb Ewbank (New York: Farrar,
Straus & Giroux, 1974), p. 275.

Ewbank began: Patterson, Football in Baltimore, p. 107.
81 Art Donovan had heard: He had won just six games during a three-year pro odyssey that

brought him from Baltimore in 1950, to Cleveland (where he was traded after a short stay in

training camp) and the New York Yanks in 1951, to Dallas and Hershey in 1952, and then, in
1953, back to Baltimore. Donovan and Drury, Fatso, p. 139.

81 As it happened: After Collier declined the Colts’ offer, his daughter, Kay, considered the

matter closed (“He had turned down the head job with the Baltimore Colts … and he certainly
would never apply for another job”). Slone, FootbalVs Gentle Giant, p. 46.
81 Just days later: Ibid., pp. 46-47.
81 “The personal depth of our relationship”: Ibid., p. 49.

81 While Brown felt: It was particularly gratifying since, just a week earlier, in the season-

ending regular season game, Detroit had continued its mastery of the Browns, winning 14-10 to

run its record against Cleveland to 8-0 overall, having beaten them in two title games, two
regular season games, and four exhibitions. Cleveland Browns Media Guide, 2003.

While the Browns: This prompted a line from co-owner Bob Hope, who before introducing

the new coach to a Rams booster club meeting, said, “Hampton Pool? That sounds like a resting
place for yachts.” St. John, Tex!, p. 180.
In those years: Schramm int.
82 And then, inevitably: Reeves was not a particularly belligerent drunk, but one who

enjoyed making others uncomfortable. Longtime Rams aide Chuck Benedict would remember

parties where, after several drinks, Reeves “used to come over and decide he was going to sit on
my lap. There was no point to it.” Benedict int.
82 “And he'd be gone”: Schramm int.
After the firing: Schramm int.
There were plenty: Faulkner int.
83 Preparing to embark: Sid Gillman int.; Esther Gillman int.
Gillman took: Halas had employed an aerial camera back in the ‘30s, and Shaughnessy had

used film study to help devise the game plan that demolished the Redskins in the 1940 title
game. Kevin Lamb, Quarterbacks, Nickelbacks and Other Loose Change: A Fan's Guide to the
Changing Game of Pro Football (Chicago: Contemporary, 1984), p. 189; Dukich int.; Phil Patton,

Razzie Dazzle: The Curious Marriage of Television and Professional Football (Garden City, NY: Dial,
1984), pp. 72-73.; Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football, p. 62.

In his first season: Schramm int.; conversation also mentioned in St. John, Tex!, p. 208.
The win fulfilled: Clary, Great Teams Great Years: Cleveland Browns, p. 44.
The emphasis on speed: Melvin Durslag, “Pro Football's Plenty Rough,” SI, Nov. 28, 1955;

Younger int.

Reports of growing violence: TexMaule, “I Don't Believe There Is Dirty Football,” 5/, Jan.

27,1957; “Savagery on Sunday,” Life, Oct. 24, 1955; Otto Graham, “Football Is Getting Too
Vicious,” 57, Oct. 11,1954.

That led: The ever-resourceful Fred Gehrke developed a face mask on his own with the Rams

in the ‘40s; Gehrke int.; Mike Brown int.; Brown and Clary, PB, pp. 232-33; Beau Riffenburgh, “A

History of Football Equipment,” The Official NFL Encyclopedia, 4th ed. (New York: New American
Library, 1986), p. 542.

The other significant change: Riffenburgh, The Official NFL Encyclopedia, p. 536; Donovan

and Drury Fatso, p. 187; Daly and O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle, p. 145.
The Colts'investment: Steadman, From Colts to Ravens, p. 131.
While teams like: Gil Brandt int.
In the aftermath of: Dan Rooney int.
John Unitas was one: Unitas int.; Gildea, When the Colts Belonged to Baltimore, p. 179; HBO

documentary Unitas, 1999.

89 So Unitas quickly learned: Unitas int.; Johnny Unitas with Ed Fitzgerald, The Johnny

Unitas Story (New York: Tempo, 1968), pp. 23-25. 89 On many a Friday night: Unitas int. 89
Unitas didn't see: Unitas int.

A year later: Gildea, When the Colts Belonged to Baltimore, p. 179.
The lone school of consequence: The University of Louisville's interest in Unitas was the

result of a lucky break. Louisville assistant coach John Dromo had been scouting a college game
at Pitt Stadium in the fall of 1950 and, needing a ride to the airport, got a lift from Unitas's high

school coach, Max Carey. After failing the summer school entrance exam at Louisville, Unitas

met with the registrar and appealed for a spot in the freshman class. He was ultimately admitted,
and would go on to graduate in four years. Unitas int.

90 At the Steelers’: Roy Blount, Jr., About Three Bricks Shy … And the Load Filled Up: The Story

of the Greatest Football Team Ever (New York: Ballantine, 1989), p. 155.

Meanwhile, Art Rooney's sons: Didinger, Great Teams Great Years: Pittsburgh Steelers, pp. 171-

72.

Kiesling's mind: Ibid., p. 171.
91 On September5: Daly and O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle, p. 155; Pittsburgh Press, Sept.

6,1955. 91 When Kiesling called him: Unitas int.; HBO documentary Unitas; Gildea, When the
Colts

Belonged to Baltimore, p. 176. 91 “Unitas was totally ignored”: Dan Rooney int.
91 Unitas received bus fare: Gildea, When the Colts Belonged to Baltimore, p. 176. 91

Unbeknownst to Unitas: Dan Rooney int.

With that shred of hope: Unitas int.; Unitas and Fitzgerald, The Johnny Unitas Story, p. 39;

Lee Greene, The Johnny Unitas Story (New York: Putnam, 1962), pp. 45-55.
By the end of: Carroll et al., Total Football II, pp. 1569-70.
92 During that fall of 1955: Greene, The Johnny Unitas Story, p. 45.

92 In February 1956: Ewbank was friends with Louisville coach Frank Camp, who gave

Unitas an enthusiastic recommendation. Line coach Herman Ball, hired away from the Steelers
after the 1955 season, also vouched for Unitas's skills. Unitas int.; Greene, The Johnny Unitas

Story, p. 72. 92 “We took pictures”: Mickey Herskowitz, “Goodbye, Johnny U.” in A Game of
Passion, Wiebusch and Silverman, eds., p. 376; Patterson, Football in Baltimore, pp. 119-20.
With only one proven quarterback: Unitas int.
From the first day: Vince Bagli and Norman Macht, Sundays at 2:00 with the Baltimore Colts

(Centreville, MD: Tidewater, 1995), p. 71.

93 Unitas still didn't cut: Frank Gifford and Harry Waters, The Whole Ten Yards (New York:

Random House, 1993), p. 187. 93 But as would be said: Unitas int.; Barry int.; Accorsi int. 93
Concerned about his tendency: Unitas int.

But it was not: Zimmerman, The Last Season of Weeb Ewbank, pp. 14—15.
If Unitas was a diamond: Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football, p. 117. 94 The Colts

were 1-2: Gildea, When the Colts Belonged to Baltimore, p. 184.

94 Ewbank would remember: Bagli and Macht, Sundays at 2:00, p. 47.
94 It was the Colts’ first win: The Browns had beaten the Colts twice in each season from
1947 through 1949, and beat the Watner-owned franchise in 1950.2003 Cleveland Browns
Media Guide.
When an elated Ewbank: Patterson, Football in Baltimore, p. 123.
Later that week: Gildea, When the Colts Belonged to Baltimore, p. 84.
6: ON ANY GIVEN SUNDAY
Shortly after a rain-drenched day: Speculation persisted later that it might have been future

Cowboys owner Clint Murchison, and his partner, Bedford Wynne, who approached Bell. But
nowhere in Murchison's life story is there evidence pointing to it being he, and his sons, Burke

and Robert, said he'd never mentioned it to them. Mara int.; Burke Murchison int.; Robert
Murchison int.; Bert Bell, Jr., int.

After Steve Owen's twenty-three-year tenure: Mara int.; Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro

Football, p. 134.

97 In 1956: Gifford int. 97 All over the city: Gifford int. 97 The dawning: Huff int.
97 “Mostly he is the administrator”: Red Smith, New York World-Telegram, undated,

probably Nov. 1958. 97 Tactically speaking: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 161.

Though they were: Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football, p. 95; Gary Cartwright, “Tom

Landry: God, Family and Football,” in A Game of Passion, Wiebusch and Silverman, eds., p. 72;
Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 161.

The antagonism was felt: Huff int.; Gifford int.
98 Lombardi, who came: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, pp. 152-54.

98 In 1956, he took: It was not obvious that this was a successful system, since opposing

teams could always change defenses when Conerly came into the game, but the Giants were
successful while using it. Ibid., p. 171. 98 Lombardi also incorporated: Don Smith, Pro Football

Hall of Fame All-Time Greats (New York: Gallery Books, 1988), p. 197. 98 “He never made a
comment”: Summerall int.

The cornerstone of the Landry defense: Summerall int.
In an age when offenses: Huff int.; Sam Huff and Leonard Shapiro, Tough Stuff: The Man in

the Middle (New York: St. Martin's, 1988), p. 50; Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always Been My
Heroes, p. 237.

99 For the advertising community: Gifford int.
“either juveniles”: MacCambridge, The Franchise, p. 22.
“I believe we began”: Herskowitz, The Golden Age of Pro Football, p. 183.
101 Presiding over the league's ascendance: Effrat, “Bell's Decisions Keep Pro Football

Family Happy, Rich.” 101 “We're as much concerned”: Ed Pollock, “Playing the Game,” TSN,
Feb. 1956. 101 Early that year, when Bell collapsed: W. C. Heinz, “Boss of the Behemoths,”
Saturday

Evening Post, Dec. 3, 1955.
Though he had matured: Ibid.
After more than a decade: Philadelphia Public Library.
102 Even in the last half: John Dell, “Bell Gave Pro Game Players and Fans,” Philadelphia

Inquirer, Oct. 13,1959.

102 CBS executive Edgar Scherick: Ron Powers, Super tube: The Rise of Television Sports (New

York: Coward-McCann, 1984), p. 85.

Many reporters would find: Bert Bell, Jr., said, “Anytime a secretary or temp would ask,

‘May I ask who's calling?,’ my dad would almost run out of his office and explain that he just
wanted the calls sent through. He was very concerned that no one think he was ducking him.”
Bert Bell, Jr., int.

West Coast teams perceived: Schramm int.
103 “When he wanted to get something done”: Herskowitz, “For Pete's Sake,” Pro!

Magazine, undated. 103 “The Fifties was a decade”: St. John, Tex!, p. 176.
The number of television sets: Powers, Supertube, p. 454.
At CBS: Ibid., pp. 89-90.

104 Within much: Johnson, Super Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians, p. 29.
By the early ‘50s: Powers, Supertube, p. 89.

Pro football would soon change that: Here, too, the ad executives in New York played a

crucial role. Early in the ‘50s, at the Madison Avenue firm of Dancer Fitzgerald & Sample, the

intensely energetic Edgar Scherick—from Long Island by way of Harvard—handled the Falstaff
Beer account and already had success with the Falstaff Game of the Week, a baseball broadcast

sent to non-major-league cities, with Dizzy Dean handling the play-by-play. In 1956, Scherick
convinced Falstaff to move much of its business to CBS, and he followed himself later that same

year, becoming the assistant to Bill MacPhail. Powers, Supertube, p. 69; Curt Smith, Voices of the
Game: The Acclaimed Chronicle of Baseball, Radio and Television Broadcasting—from 1921 to the
Present (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992), pp. 143-46.

105 In 1956, though: Technically, only eleven of the twelve franchises had contracts with

CBS that season, because the Browns still operated with their own regional network. The flagship

station for the Browns’ network, though, was WJW-TV in Cleveland, a CBS affiliate. Mike Brown
int.; Dino Lucarelli int.; Tim Brulia, “A Chronology of Pro Football on Television: Part 1,” The
Coffin Corner, Vol. 26, No. 3 (2004).

105 During that 1956 season: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 169.
105 While each team negotiated: The full wording of Rule 4(b): “No Game shall be broadcast

by television into the Home territory (i.e. within seventy-five (75) miles from the home stadium)
of any other League team without the consent of such team on any day such other League team is
playing a game in its home stadium; no Home game shall be broadcast by television on the day

of such Game into any area included within a seventy-five (75) mile radius of the stadium in

which such game is played without prior consent of the Team, the visiting team and the
Commissioner. New York Giants TV contract, CBS News, Nov. 25,1958.
105 Under Bell, the television networks: Ibid.
105 “I never would and never have”: AP, “Players Association Doesn't Bother Bell,”

publication unknown, Feb. 16, 1957 (PFHOF Archives).

The announcer Bob Wolff: Smith, Of Mikes and Men, p. 44.
The numbers were hard to argue: NFL Record &Fact Book. 106 Even the national press:

Weiss int.

106 “A combination of things”: Frank Finch, “Torrid Battle Likely to Hike NFL Gate 10 pet.,”

Los Angeles Times, date unknown (PFHOF Archives).

“On any given Sunday”:“Today, any team can beat another on any given Sunday, whether it

be first or last,” said Bell. AP, “Players Association Doesn't Bother Bell.”

“The scouting department”: Gil Brandt, then a scout for the Rams, concurred with Dukich's

opinion that the Rams’ system had Brown rated above Ar nett. Brandt int.; Dukich int.

108 The two quarterbacks that most: Accounts vary on what happened next. Some people

report that Paul Brown was crushed when he discovered he'd get neither Brodie nor Daw-son,
and made his selection reluctantly. Paul Brown's son, Mike, said his father wanted Brodie badly,

but was less enthusiastic about Dawson, because of questions about his arm strength. Dawson
himself, contacted by the Browns prior to the draft, had heard otherwise. Mike Brown int.; Len
Dawson int.; Dukich int.; Brandt int.

108 With the two quarterbacks gone: Cleveland writer Terry Pluto insists that when the

Browns’ turn came, Paul Brown “never hesitated. He picked Jim Brown and then thought, ‘I can

get a quarterback from somewhere else.’ ” Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, p. 173;
MacCambridge, “Jim Brown, All-Everything,” £5PJV Sports Century, p. 190.
108 After a touchdown run: Jim Brown int.
108 Huff was already a young star: Huff and Shapiro, Tough Stuff, p. 31.
Brown confounded: Jim Brown and Steve Delsohn, Out of Bounds (New York: Kensington,

1989), p. 77.

He would at once bridle: Ibid., p. 71.
All season long, the Giants: After the Browns game, one of the members of the Giants’ taxi

squad, the strong-armed quarterback Jack Kemp, who'd drifted from the Lions to the Steelers to

the Giants, jotted a quick note to his friend Doug Gerhart, an aspiring quarterback at his alma

mater Occidental College. Kemp's letter provides a glimpse of what it must have felt like to
experience that heady season firsthand. “We won again yesterday,” wrote Kemp. “The greatest

game I've ever seen. Gosh Doug I've never been so excited in my life. What a life. N.Y. is so great

& they love the Giants now & we get big dinners free & meet all the sports personalities & it's
tremendous. Also lots of money.” A week later, winning the conference title would have a
tangible impact on the lives of many of the players: Kemp would be voted a full share of playoff
money, allowing him to put a down payment on his first house in California.; Kemp int.; Kemp
letter to Doug Gerhart.

110 In Cleveland, several players grumbled: Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, p.

42.

Weeb Ewbank made: Donovan and Drury, Fatso, pp. 36-37; Patterson, Football in Baltimore,

pp. 143-44.

On fourth-and-goal at the two: Unitas int.; Gildea, When the Colts Belonged to Baltimore, p.

236.

112 The exquisite tension of overtime: Steadman int.; Bert Bell, Jr., int. 112 In the Giants’

locker room: Steadman, From Colts to Ravens, p. 149. 112 Even the losers: Mara int.

The Colts headed home: John Steadman, The Greatest Football Game Ever Played: When the

Baltimore Colts and the New York Giants Faced Sudden Death (Stevensville, MD: Press Box, 1998),

p. 72.
When the bus was finally extricated: Ibid., p. 73.
Assessing the mob scene: Ibid., p. 72.
By the end of the‘50s: Smith, Pro Football Hall of Fame All-Time Greats, p. 141.
In Smith's view: Ibid., p. 122.
“My interest emotionally”: Hunt int.
7: “A LIGHT BULB CAME ON”
116 The best ideas: Seneca, Epistles, 12,11. 116 “The NFL in the‘50s”: Kemp int.
116 Shortly thereafter: Kemp int.; Summer all int.
117 Minneapolis was growing: Plaintiffs’ proposed findings of fact and conclusions of law,

AFL v. NFL, US 12599, p. 518.

117 The Minneapolis group: Adams int.; Halas deposition, AFL v. NFL, US 12599.
117 The NFL wouldn't: Bert Bell letter to Howsam, May 27, 1958, API v. NFL, US 12599,

Exhibit 96 (J).

117 American companies: Patterson, Grand Expectations, p. 315.
117 The league did consent: Halas deposition, AFL v. NFL, US 12599.
The lowly Cardinals: While Bidwill had been among George Halas's best friends, the

relationship between Halas and the Wolfners was poisonous. An irreparable split came in 1957,

when the Cardinals had negotiated for the rights to play at Northwestern's handsome Dyche
Stadium, just north of Chicago in Evanston, and Halas nixed the deal, producing a twenty-eight-

year-old agreement—subsequently honored by Bell—that forbade the Bears to play home games
south of Madison Street, or the Cardinals to play home games north of there. Walter Wolfner had

vacillated for years among the choices of selling his club, moving it elsewhere, or remaining in
Chicago to fight Halas and the Bears to the death. There was no reasoning with Wolfner on the

subject. “You know, Halas is up there in years,” Wolfner told more than one potential buyer.
“He's liable to go anytime now.” (As it turned out, Wolfner died in 1963; Halas died in 1985.)
Summer all int.; Jack Olsen, “Un-happiest Millionaire,” 5/, Apr. 4, 1960.
Born in 1932: Hunt int.; Fortune, Apr. 5, 1948.
118 From the age of six: Much younger than his siblings, Lamar was shy but enthusiastic, and

remained composed despite the pathos in the Hunt family, from the revelation that H. L. Hunt
had been living and raising a completely different family, secretly, in Shreveport, to the nervous

breakdown of Lamar's oldest brother, the strong-willed, preternatural oilman Hassie Hunt.
Hassie's illness had a rending effect on both Hunt parents. And for the rest of the Hunt boys, it

left a father who was not just absent frequently, but also heartbroken about his prized son's

condition. “Hassie was the old man's favorite son,” said one family friend. “And after he got so

ill, it was very difficult for Mr. Hunt to get very close to any of the other boys, to be truthful.”
Not-for-attributi on int.; Don Kowet, The Rich Who Own Sports (New York: Random House, 1977),
pp. 77-100; E. Shrake, “The Big Daddy of Sport,” SI, Sep. 7, 1970.

118 He was a decent: H. L. Hunt was a notorious gambler, known to bet vast sums on college

football—maintaining a running bet of $50,000 per game with a Florida gambler named Jimmy
“The Greek” Snyder in the early’50s—and he kept a dedicated, unlisted phone line in his office

used solely to converse with his bookmakers. Jimmy Snyder, Jimmy the Greek(Chicago: Playboy,
1975), pp. 82-89.

119 Forrest Gregg: Forrest Gregg int. 119 On less affable men: Buddy Rupe int. 119 After

graduating with: Hunt int. 119 Late in 1958: Ibid.

He'd been negotiating:“Lamar had more money than God,” said Charlie Bidwill's son Stormy,

who'd taken an active interest in the franchise from an early age and who with his brother, Bill,
would eventually inherit the franchise from his mother. “Well, the only thing that he ever spent

that we could figure out was that he might have spent some money for his clothes. Otherwise, he
never spent a nickel. My mother turned to me at one point and says, ‘I don't understand—I've
never seen a man so cheap.’ “Stormy Bidwill int.

“Do you know Bud Adams?”: Murray Olderman, “Texas Gateway to Sports Expansion,”

Houston Press, Jan. 12, 1960, which credited Wolfner saying, “Of course, you realize big money
in Minneapolis, Houston, Seattle, Denver and Buffalo has also been after us.”

120 Under the heading: Lamar Hunt notes, Hunt papers, as displayed on Kansas City Chiefs

history mural at Arrowhead Pavilion.

121 When Hunt suggested: Hunt deposition, AFL v. NFL, US 12599, p. 55. 121 In his

subterranean office: Curran, The $400,000 Quarterback, p. 27.

One of Adams's peers would later say: Not-for-attribution int.
“If I could come up with”: Adams int.; George Sullivan, Touchdown! The Picture History of the

American Football League (New York: Putnam, 1967), p. 11.

122 “We folks here in Minnesota”: Letter from Ole Haugsrud to Lamar Hunt, July 1959. AFL

v. NFL, US 12599, Exhibit.

122 Through friend and former tennis star: Lou Sahadi, Miracle in Miami: The Miami

Dolphins Story (Chicago: Regnery, 1972), p. 7.

122 in New York: Curran, The $400,000 Quarterback, pp. 22-23.
122 His friend David Dixon: Hunt deposition, AFL v. NFL, US 12599, pp. 54-55.
On June 2: Hunt int.; Bert Bell, Jr., int.

After the meal: Hunt deposition, AFL v. NFL, US 12599, p. 76.
123 “I was at least intelligent”: Joe McGuff, Winning It All: The Chiefs of the AFL (Garden City

NY: Doubleday, 1970), p. 11.

123 Bell declined: Sahadi, Miracle in Miami, p. 10.
123 On July 26: With the news relayed by O'Brien, Hunt called Bell personally and ended any

mystery. He said he'd be glad to have Bell mention the new league, but didn't want the specific
cities or anyone's name used at that point. Ibid.; Hunt int.

123 “The more football there is”: Senate Subcommittee on Antitrust and Monopoly, Orga

nized Professional Team Sports Hearings, 86th Cong., 1st Sess., July 1959, S. Res. 57 on S. 616 and
S. 886, p. 40.

124 “All of you will enjoy this”: Sahadi, Miracle in Miami, p. 12. 124 “I really liked Bert

Bell”: Hunt int.

The first meeting: Jack Horrigan and Mike Rathet, The Other League: The Fabulous Story of the

American Football League (Chicago: Follett, 1970), p. 15; minutes from first AFL meeting, Aug. 14,
1959.

When asked to name: Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes, p. 11.
125 “Everybody has been knocking”: First part of quotation, McGuff, Winning It All, p. 29;
second part of quotation, after ellipsis, Hunt also recalled saying in interview. 125 “What can

I do?”: Sullivan, Touchdown!, p. 17.

“If Adams and Lamar Hunt”: Jack Gallagher, Sporttalk column, “Now Is the Time for AFL to

Throw in the Towel, Give Up,” Houston Post, Aug. 31, 1959.

The1959 season: Jimmy Breslin, “Bell Devoted Life to Game He Loved,” New York Journal-

American, Nov. 12, 1959.

126 “A guy who needed a haircut”: Ibid.
One writer said: Red Smith, To Absent Friends (New York: Atheneum, 1982), p. 374.
Two days after: Bert Bell, Jr., int.; Bell with Chanoff, “Any Given Sunday.” 127 “Mr. Pauley's

pitch”: Hunt deposition, AFL v. NFL, US 12599, pp. 154-55.
The AFLhad: AFL meeting minutes, Nov. 21,1959.
“Yes!”he shouted: Hunt int.; Adams int.

128 While the Minneapolis group: Finding of Facts, AFL v. NFL, US 12599, p. 34/(533).
128 Conducted amid: The Personnel Committee included Chargers GM Frank Leahy, Texans

GM Don Rossi and chief scout Will Walls, Denver GM Dean Griffing, and Houston head of
scouting John Breen. With college football still a one-platoon game at the time, the group

selected the twenty-four best players at each position among college seniors, divided them into

tiers of eight, and then drew the names out of a hat, for eight teams at each tier of each position,
with each club allotted thirty-three players in all. Another draft weeks later would swell the
ranks to fifty-three players per team. Hunt int.; Adams int.

It would be: Hunt int.; Ed Gruver, The American Football League: A Year-by-Year History, 1960-

1969 (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1997), p. 34.

But the franchise: Joe Foss and Donna Foss, A Proud American: The Autobiography of Joe Foss

(New York: Pocket Books, 1992), p. 243; William Ryczek, Crash of the Titans: The Early Years of
the New York Jets and the AFL (Kingston, NY: Total Sports, 2000), pp. 20-21.

129 “They certainly”:“No Pushing Around, Senator Warns NFL,” Houston Post, Jan. 9, 1960.
But this was unfair: Hunt int.; Bert Bell, Jr., int.
“It is my contention”: Ray Gillespie, “Veeck Lashes O.B. ‘Horse-and-Buggy Policies,’ ” TSN,

Dec. 24, 1952.

130 The principle that Veeck:The Sporting News noted that between his TV proposals and

other machinations, “Veeck caught the delegates so unprepared and so disrupted the proceedings
that he forced a flurry of parliamentary rulings, points of order, two recesses and an extra session

late in the afternoon of Dec. 4.” Edgar J. Brands, “Minors Reject Moves to Loosen Major Ties,”
TSN, Dec. 10,1952; Howard Green int.; Stan Mcllvaine int.

“Under this system”: Shirley Povich, “Veeck Still Hopes to Get His Foot in Door,” TSN, Dec.

17, 1952.

In 1953: Schramm int.
131 Despite his strong influence: Bell campaigned strongly for pooling TV revenue at the

league meetings in 1956 and again in 1958, and his friend Jiggs Donoghue, co-owner of the

Eagles and assistant treasurer of the league, said that Bell often argued that “one of the most
important things to the league was developing a package deal for television, to protect all the

lower clubs. He wanted to see to it that everybody in the league got the same amount of money.”
Joe Donoghue, testimony, AFL v. NFL, US 12599, p. 1792.

“It has been reported”: Statement, May 18, 1960, Rickey Papers, Library of Congress.
On the plane: It had been just weeks since Hunt had heard Branch Rickey's Continental

League proposal, and he recalled how impressed he'd been with the revenue-sharing concept

relating to TV broadcasts that Rickey had outlined. He decided that a new football league should

certainly operate in the same manner. He wrote: “(8) All TV and radio must be league-approved;
(9) TV money will go lArd to individual clubs and 2Ard to league.” In this, Hunt was assuming that

each team would negotiate its own local TV deal, that it would keep one third of its TV revenue,

then the other two thirds would go into a central pool, where it would be divided equally among
all of the franchises, precisely as Rickey had outlined in his Continental League prospectus.

Hunt's personal copy of papers. (In the coming months, Hunt would simplify this idea further in

the coming months, eventually suggesting that the league go with a joint league-wide contract,
negotiated with a national network by the league on behalf of all teams, then split evenly among

the clubs.); Lamar Hunt int.; Lamar Hunt notes, Hunt papers, as displayed on Kansas City Chiefs
history mural at Arrowhead Pavilion.

After neither NBC nor CBS: Johnson, Super Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians, p. 130.
In a memo to Scherick: Marc Günther and Bill Carter, Monday Night Mayhem: The Inside Story

of ABC's Monday Night Football (New York: Beech Tree, 1988), p. 18.

133 Arledge would bring: Roone Ar ledge, Roone: A Memoir (New York: HarperCollins, 2003),

p. 64; Patton, Razzie Dazzle, pp. 63-64.
8: THE SIEGE

136 “Too much like a policeman”: Bidwill int.
136 “George Halas, in my presence”: Spadia int.; tabulation of voting, author unknown, St.

Louis Rams archives.

136 After another vote yielded:“Deadlock Holds on Successor to Bell,” Houston Post, Jan. 22,

1960.

137 As the days dragged on: Jimmy Burns, “Spotlighting Sports,” Miami Herald, Jan. 23,

1960. 137 League PR director: Bert Bell, Jr., int.

Bert Bell had once told: Bert Bell, Jr., int.; Mara int.; JackBrennan, “Rozelle, Others Recall

Brown's Humor,” Cincinnati Enquirer, Aug. 6,1991.
“If Jesus Christ himself”: Bidwill int.

138 From their vantage point: The other names considered included Giants GM Ray Walsh,

Redskins GM Dick McCann, and the Steelers’ longtime PR man Ed Kiley. Wellington Mara int.;
“The New Commish,” Extension Magazine, December 1960.
138 Sittingthere silently: Wellington Mara int.
“I know he's young”: Ibid.
Ray Rozelle filled out: Rozelle papers.
139 In earlier generations:“The Playboy Interview: Pete Rozelle,” Playboy, Oct. 1973.
139 Alvin Ray Rozelle: Not-for-attributi on int.; Dick Rozelle letter to author, Nov. 29, 2000.

139 Pete grew up: Pete's father, Ray Rozelle, the son of a farmer who settled on the outskirts

of Compton late in the nineteenth century, had returned from World War I and gone straight to
work, living in Lynwood, California, one of America's first true suburbs. Ray Rozelle was

essentially self-educated, a man who never attended college but could master a Sunday

crossword in thirty minutes. During the Depression, he kept his Pacific Market open, extending

credit to numerous friends and acquaintances. Many were predictably unable to pay him back,

and in the mid-’30s—after his mother refused to bail him out—his business went under. The
failure was, by all accounts, a devastating event that made Ray Rozelle more taciturn, if no less

hardworking. Dick Rozelle int.; Anne Marie Bratton (née Rozelle) int.; Pete Rozelle letter to Aunt
Martha and Uncle Glenn, Sept. 17,1983, Pete Rozelle papers.
139 At the family's: Dick Rozelle int.
The childhood lesson: Pete Rozelle was friendly, supportive, and got along, but was

overmatched on the playing fields at Lynwood elementary. A teacher recommended he sit out a

year of school—so as to catch up physically—and after seventh grade, he spent the 1939-40
school year in the rural Northern California hills of Ceres, at the ranch of family friends Dana

and Frank Menzel. Much of that year was spent doing chores in the morning, playing basketball
in the afternoon on a rim he'd put up outside the Menzels’ farmhouse, and reading in the

evening, especially newspapers and sports books, from Bill Stern's Sports Stories to the best of Clair
Bee. He returned to school a year later, still smallish and kind, but with a newly robust
confidence and stature. Dick Rozelle int.; Helen Rozelle int.; Leland Rozelle int.; Anne Marie
Bratton int.; Pete Rozelle letter to Francis R. Ruggieri, April 4, 1988, Rozelle papers; Al Stump,

“Pete Rozelle: Czar Between the Goal Posts,” Los Angeles Herald Examiner Sunday Magazine, Nov.
2,1969; Rozelle papers.

At Lynwood Junior High: Dick Rozelle int.
140 Ray had bought: Alvin [Pete] Rozelle, “Sports in Review,” Tartar Shield, Compton

College, Mar. 31,1944.

140 By then, Rozelle had found: Dick Zehms, “In This Corner,” Long Beach Press-Telegram,

1957.

140 By high school: Leland Rozelle int.; John Lehman int.; Max Patterson int.; Rozelle papers.
140 Rozelle was as transformed: John Lehman int.; Max Patterson int.; Pete Rozelle,

“Winning the War on the Home Front,” composition for unknown class, circa 1943, Rozelle
papers.

There were home movies: Rozelle family video.
“They were all climbing”: Patterson int.
141 Rozelle, who saw: Rozelle saw no battle, but he did meet a Japanese family during a port

stay in Tokyo at the end of the war, and was invited into their home, returning to the states with
numerous gifts. Dick Rozelle int.

Rozelle was unfazed: John Wiebusch, “Q&A,” GameDay Magazine, Vol. 20, No. 3, Sep. 1989.
When the team: Lehman int.
142 Finishing his undergraduate: Newell int.

142 That same year: Paul Zimmerman, “Pete Wanted Job of Sports Editor,” LÄT, Jan.

28,1960.

In 1951, the lightly regarded: Matson returned kicks of 94 and 90 yards for touchdowns in

the game, and the press was convinced. Writing in the New York Herald Tribune, Harold
Rosenthal joked that “Rozelle should have ‘his stripes removed’ for not telling the members of

the fourth estate ‘more’ about this extraordinary runner.” Kristine Setting Clark, Undefeated,
Untied, and Uninvited: A Documentary of the 1951 University of San Francisco Dons Football Team
(Irvine, CA: Griffin, 2002), p. 61.

Heavily influenced by: In a letter sent to Rozelle in May 1954, Macker discussed his plans to

open his own prestige PR firm: “I am going into this—if I do—with the idea of making it a top
public relations firm, and a lifetime business. I would want you to think of it in those terms, too.

I am going after only business firms and similar accounts. No political campaigns, and no shortterm accounts (such as sports shows, auto shows)…. I know you are building your future, and are

not interested in a fly-by-night operation, or in taking a big gamble. I would not invite you in the

organization unless I am reasonably sure— as sure as you can be in a business venture—of the
possibility of success.” P. K. Macker letter to Pete Rozelle, May 3,1954, Rozelle papers. 143
Within months: For a fee of $82,500, Rozelle and Macker spent the nine months leading up to
the games working almost entirely on increasing the Melbourne Olympic profile in the U.S. Both
Rozelle and Macker logged 100,000 air miles in publicizing the effort—and during the first six
months garnered more than 100,000 column inches of coverage in their clip files. Acquiring a list

of all Americans traveling to Melbourne for the games, they set up a series of remote television
interviews with the tourists, which they packaged into customized travelogues, interspersed with

scenes of Melbourne and the games. P. K. Macker, A PR Concept, 1956, strategic prospectus
prepared by Ken Macker and Pete Rozelle for Victoria Organizing Committee, Rozelle papers.
By the end: Bert Bell, Jr., int.; Schramm int.
He presided over: Bob Hunter, “Rams Still Unsigned,” Los Angeles Examiner, Apr. 29,1957.

144 Rozelle's presence: Rube Samuelson, “Rube Barbs: Man in Fifty Million,” Independent
Star-News, Jan. 31,1960; Schramm int.

Rozelle earned: Bert Bell, Jr., would recall his dad receiving a call from Rozelle one evening

in 1958, on the verge of resigning. But the commissioner reassured him and emphasized his

support. Maureen Reeves Woodland letter to Pete Rozelle, Aug. 20, 1986, Rozelle papers; Bert
Bell, Jr., int.

Within six months:“Who Is Pete Rozelle,” Los Angeles Examiner, Jan. 27, 1960; Jerry Greene,

“Rozelle's Reign a 26-year Success Story,” Orlando Sentinel, Jan. 19,1986.

On November 30: Bob Oates, “Rams Get Cannon ‘First,’ ” Los Angeles Examiner, Dec. 1, 1959;

Curran, The $400,000 Quarterback, p. 110; Horrigan and Rathet, The Other League, p. 20.
“I'm sure he wants”: Adams int.
A few minutes later: Dick Peebles, “Voice of the Peebles: 83,000 Saw Cannon Sign,” Houston

Chronicle, Jan. 6,1960; Herskowitz, “For Pete's Sake” Pro!Magazine, undated.
“Pete,” Brown said: Rozelle papers.

149 “Don't worry”: Mel Durslag, “A Clean Beginning,” Los Angeles Examiner, Feb. 9, 1960. 149

With a bashful smile:“Pete, don't take it,” said the 49ers Vic Morabito. “They'll cut you to

ribbons.” But Rozelle's composure was quickly returning, and he explained calmly that he felt
he'd survive if elected, since he hadn't campaigned for the job and because the league faced too

many problems at the moment. John Devaney, “The Inner Workings of the NFL,” Sport, Dec.
1964.

149 It was Brown: Letter from Pete Rozelle to Mike Brown, Feb. 13,1994, Rozelle papers.
149 Rooney in turn agreed: Mara int.
149 By his own estimate: Undated letter to Mike Brown, Rozelle papers.
149 Returning to the conference room: Rozelle was introduced to the assembled press corps,

which had already stayed five days longer than they'd planned—through a spate of unsea

sonably cold weather, with little news to report—and were restless, cranky, and by then

ravenous for news. The first question came from Louis Effrat of the New York Times, who asked,
“Tell us, Commissioner, do you consider yourself a compromise candidate?” The question

temporarily left him at a loss for words, until both he and many of the assembled reporters
started laughing. Harold Rosenthal, Fifty Faces of Football (New York: Atheneum, 1981), p. 99.

150 When asked about Bell's: Art Rosenbaum column, San Francisco Chronicle, Jan. 28, 1960.

150 “I hesitate calling it”: George Strickler, “Rozelle, Ram Official, New NFL Chief,” Chicago
Tribune, Jan. 27, 1960.
150 “We knew within twenty-four hours”: Mara int.

150 As the owners: Doc Greene, “The Detroit News Sports Quiz: Contracts Key to Grid Peace,”

Detroit News, Feb. 2, 1960. 150 Much of the national press: Joe King, “New NFL Boss—
Monarch or Mouthpiece?” TSN, Feb.8, 1960.
9: THE NEW FRONTIER
Forrest Gregg had: Forrest Gregg int.
The tension between: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 239.
Green Bay's last NFL title:Fabulous Fifties, Part 2, NFL Films. 154 Forrest Gregg, arriving in

1957: Gregg int.

154 After the 1-10-11958 campaign: John Wiebusch, Lombardi (Chicago: Follett, 1971), p.

77. 154 At St. Norbert's: Gregg int.
What startled Gregg: Ibid.
There was: Don Phillips, Run to Win: Vince Lombardi on Coaching and Leadership (New York: St.

Martin's, 2002), p. 92.

155 Lombardia philosophy: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 79.
Within that context: Hamilton Maule, The Players (New York: New American Library, 1967),

pp. 6-7.

After the Packers routed: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 294.
156 Rozelle's “transitional” year: On May 3, the Rozelles had signed a five-month lease and

moved into a furnished house in Philadelphia at 2417 North 51st Street, but they stayed for less

than a month before leasing their apartment in New York City. Thelma Elkjer's appointment
notebooks, Rozelle papers.

In July:“PR Blood, Sweat and Security at 65,” University of San Francisco Alumnus, Nov./Dec.

1962.

“Well,” said Rozelle: Weiss int.; John Devaney “The Inner Workings of the NFL,” Sport, Dec.

1964.

157 Shortly after the end: Cathy Kensil int.; Larry Felser, “Memories,” GameDay Magazine,

Sep.1989. 157 The hiring raised eyebrows: Kensil letter to Arnold Zeitlin, UPI correspondent,
March 12, 1961.

In Kensil: Jim Kensil int.; Cathy Kensil int.; Larry Felser, “Memories.”
Kensil increased the quality: The new wire story transmission format was known as TTS.

“The league began to be more anticipatory of what people might want,” said Don Weiss, who had
been a colleague of Kensil's at AP (and who would himself join the league office in 1965).
“Instead of being the same tired old stuff that they used to throw at you—or not throw at you as

the case maybe, because unless you were one of a few people, you couldn't get much of
anything.” Don Weiss int.

158 Even before: Jack Sell, “Roamin Around” column, Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Sep. 6,1961.

158 Later in October:“Violent World of Sam Huff,” Daly and O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle,
pp. 171-73.

Life magazine's:Life, Dec. 5, 1960.
For his part:“Violent Face of Pro Football,” SI, Oct. 24, 1960; Modell int.; Thelma Elkjer's

notes.

159 In Rozelle's words: Pete Rozelle int. in 1995, for The Franchise.
159 In a confidential 1962 letter: Coverage inside the magazine also reflected the change: 5/

ran ten pro football stories (not counting department pieces) in 1955, thirteen in 1956, and
thirteen in 1957; that number of stories had almost doubled by 1963 (and would reach thirty by
the mid-’60s). MacCambridge, The Franchise, p. 124.

159 There was also: Ethel Kennedy int.; Summerall int.; Zimmerman, The Last Season of Weeb

Ewbank, p. 31.

160 John R Kennedy: Ethel Kennedy int. 160 “I'm sure there”: Ethel Kennedy int.
As Bert Bell: Gillman int.; Gruver, The American Football League, pp. 38-44; Ryczek, Crash of

the Titans, pp. 90-91.

Jack Kemp: Kemp int.; Ryczek, Crash of the Titans, pp. 73-74.
161 Though the Chargers: Mark Ribowsky, Slick: The Silver and Black Life of Al Davis (New

York: Macmillan, 1991), p. 102.

161 Grave circumstances: Daly and O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle, p. 180; Curran, The

$400,000 Quarterback, p. 100.

162 But even if the level: Adams int.; Hunt int.; Gruver, The American Football League, p. 168.

162 “The Texans tried”: Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days, p. 37.
Hunt also hired: Hunt int.

On Sunday: Schramm int.; Curran, The $400,000 Quarterback, p. 157; St. John, Tex!, p. 257.
163 Meanwhile: St. John, Tex!, p. 257, Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days, p. 38. 163 Behind

diminutive quarterback: Eisenberg, Cotton BowlDays, p. 38.

When a reporter: Curran, The $400,000 Quarterback, p. 152.
“No, our team”: William C. Rhoden, “When Paul Brown Smashed the Color Barrier,”

JV77;Sep.25,1997.

164 But in every city: Schramm int.; St. John, Tex!, p. 282; Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always

Been My Heroes, p. 71.

“If I ever hear”: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, pp. 239-41; Arthur Daley, “Sports of the

Times: The Weight of Experience,” NYT, Dec. 28,1966.

Even among Marshall's defenders: Thomas G. Smith, “Civil Rights on the Gridiron: The

Kennedy Administration and the Desegregation of the Washington Redskins,” The Coffin Corner,
Vol. 10, originally published in Journal of Sport History, Vol. 14, No. 2, Summer 1987.

165 Few were more vigilant: Povich, “This Morning with Shirley Povich,” Washington Post,

Oct. 31,1960.

After checking first: Alan Levy, Tackling Jim Crow: Racial Segregation in Professional Football

(Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1997), p. 128.

The 1961 season: Robert Deindorfer, “Has Pro Football Passed by Paul Brown?” Sport, June

1962.
166 In the absence of Dawson int.; Bobby Mitchell int.; Didinger, “A Remembrance of Paul

Brown,” in A Game of Passion, Wiebusch and Silverman, eds., pp. 247-48; Pluto, When All the
World Was Browns Town, pp. 25-26.

167 When halfback Bobby Mitchell: Mitchell int. 167 “Bobby had to go”: Jim Brown int.
167 In 1961, the Browns: Modell int.
Yet Modell: Ibid.
Early in the 1961 season: Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, p. 46. 168 “What

do you think”: Ibid., pp. 50-51.

Had Davis been: Rosenthal, Fifty Faces of Football, p. 211.
“I'm sorry Mr. Marshall”: Levy, Tackling Jim Crow, p. 136.
169 The team returned: Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, p. 56.
“Harold, I need your advice”: Modell int.
Modell fretted: Modell didn't do anything at first. But a week after the season, he began to

hear that a group of disaffected Browns, including Jim Brown, had held a private meeting to

discuss their grievances with Paul Brown, and were prepared to confront Modell about the issue.
Before they could do so, he intervened. Modell int.; Jim Brown int.

170 “Paul, sit down please”: Modell int.; Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, pp. 60-

63.

170 Brown's face was blank: Some would later charge Modell with announcing the firing

during the heart of Cleveland's newspaper strike, to minimize the criticism he might receive.

But the strike had been going on for weeks. And not to be muzzled, Cleveland newspaperman

Hal Lebovitz organized a group of city sportswriters to weigh in on the firing and published a
twenty-four-page booklet titled The Play Paul Brown Didn't Call, which sold more than 50,000
copies in the ensuing months, and was so evenhanded it left both Mo-dell and Brown angry
Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, pp. 61-62; Modell int.; Mike Brown int.

170 A day after firing Brown: Had Collier not taken the coaching job, he might have left

anyway; the Colts’ new head coach, former Browns defensive back Don Shula, had been urging
him to come and work with him in Baltimore. Shula int.; Kay Collier-McLaughlin int.; Pluto,
When All the World Was Browns Town, pp. 65-67.

170 Collier called Brown: Mike Brown int.; Kay Collier-McLaughlin int.
170 But soon after: Mike Brown int.; Kay Collier-McLaughlin int.
Paul Brown: Those closest to Brown would describe his mood as heartbroken. Days later, in a

moment of reflection, Brown confided in his friend Herb Eisele, head coach at John Carroll

University. “If I ever get back into coaching,” he told Eisele, “I'll never let a team get away from
me again.” Natali, Brown's Town, pp. 533-34; Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, p. 63.
By 1960: Rozelle papers; Patton, Razzie Dazzle, p. 53.
“There's a couple of”: Rooney int.
172 A year later: League minutes, National Football League annual meetings, Jan. 24, 1961.

172 Two days: Prior to that meeting, Lombardi worked the room, canvassing other smaller-

market franchises, warning the Cardinals’ Stormy Bidwill, “You know, you'll die with us.” “Hey,
Coach,” said Bidwill. “You don't have to tell me that; I know it.” Bidwill int. 172 The Giants:
Bidwill int.

After much debate:“RESOLVED, That the Commissioner of the National Football League is

hereby authorized to negotiate and conclude an agreement with a national television network
whereunder the league shall sell and the network shall purchase all rights of the League and its
member clubs of the League…. Said agreement shall provide that (1) no game shall be telecast

within the home territory of a member club, without the consent of such club, on the day when
such club is playing a game at home and (2) every regular season Sunday afternoon games

between member clubs shall, to the extent practicable, be made available to all affiliated stations

of the network located within the home territory of the visiting club.” League minutes, National
Football League annual meetings, Jan. 27,1961.

The curious reasoning:Sports Illustrated^ unsigned editorial in the August 7, 1961, issue aptly

cited the apparent blind justice of the decision. Grim's ruling, argued 5/, “has the effect of
encouraging the rich to get richer and obliging the poor to remain that way, surely the opposite

intent of antitrust legislation. In addition, the richer teams would inevitably become better
teams, and the poorer teams would become worse teams. It seems to us too bad that a distinction

before the law cannot be made between a sports association—to whose advantage (and the

public's) it is to field evenly matched teams—and, say, a group of car manufacturers. Pro
football, we agree, is as much business as it is sport, but it is a special kind of business and
should be treated accordingly.” “Grim Decision,” in Scorecard, 5/, Aug. 7,1961.

173 After a round: Max Patterson int. 173 On September 30,1961: Patton, Pazzie Dazzle, p.

56. 173 In ensuingyears: Powers, Supertube, p. 174.

173 “The whole thing”: Early draft of interview transcript with the American Academy of

Achievement, Rozelle papers.
10: THE CZAR

175 Vince Lombardi sat: Statement; “Re: Paul Vernon Hornung, Green Bay Packers, Report of

Thomas J. McShane, Polygraph Expert, 1963,” Rozelle papers.

175 “Well, you have no choice”: Rozelle int. for The Franchise; Maraniss, When Pride Still

Mattered, pp. 339-40.
176 The chatter about: AP, “Inquiry Widens in Pro Football,” NYT, Jan. 8, 1963; UPI,

“Hoodlums Linked to Detroit Lions”NYT, Jan. 9, 1963.

176 By January 9:“Memorandum of Meeting at Plaza Hotel, NYC, with Commissioner Rozelle

and Paul Hornung,” Jan. 9,1963, Rozelle papers.

McShane had:“Re: Paul Vernon Hornung, Green Bay Packers, Report of Thomas J. McShane,

Polygraph Expert, 1963.”

Though Shapiro: Hornung's relationship with Shapiro included weekly calls during the

season, with Hornung calling Shapiro collect in Las Vegas every Wednesday evening, between

7:00 and 8:00 p.m. “Shapiro would quote a pointspread to him,” according to Mc-Shane's report

of his interview with Hornung, “and he [Hornung] would comment on it, either going along with
it by betting, or not betting at all. Shapiro would inquire as to the condition of the team at this
time, and he would call Hornung back on the Saturday nights before the games to check again on

the condition of the team before bets were placed. Hornung said he would furnish information to
Shapiro regularly on these occasions regarding the physical condition of the Packer players.”
Ibid.; National Football League Players Contract.

On the morning of April 17: John Devaney, “The Inner Workings of the NFL,” Sport, Dec.

1964.

Bunkered in the league offices: NFL release, “National Football League Commissioner's

Report on Investigation.”

178 Rozelle's public face:“Hornung, Karras Suspended for Betting,” Washington Post, Apr. 18,

1963; AP, “Grid Bettors Out for Year,” Baltimore Sun, Apr. 19,1963.

178 Karras was much more critical: Shirley Povich, “This Morning … with Shirley Povich,”

column, Washington Post, Apr. 19,1963.

The public and media response:“Judgment Day,” Newsweek, Apr. 29, 1963; Jim Murray,

“Football's Fail-Safe,” column, LAT, Apr. 19,1963.

About a week: Loretta Hornung letter to Pete Rozelle, undated, 1963; Rozelle letter to Loretta

Hornung, dated April 30, 1963, Rozelle papers.

179 The fallout: There remained an unfounded rumor that Rosenbloom had bet a large sum

on the 1958 championship game, then urged Ewbank, in the waning moments of overtime, to go
for a touchdown rather than field goal so the Colts could cover the three-and-a-half-point spread.

This would seem, self-evidently, one of the more baseless rumors in sports history. Ewbank and
Rosenbloom had no contact during the final stages of the game, and even if they had, one strains
to imagine how John Unitas would have responded to such a directive.
179 Two different Colts employees: Not-for-attributi onints.

Throughout the previous: Hunt int.; Pash int.
Writing after: Don Weiss int.; Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, pp. 325-26; Bob Oates,

“Lombardi Fears Packers Past Peak,” Los Angeles Herald Examiner, Dec. 6, 1962.

180 “In fairness”: Tex and Dorothy Maule also lived in the same Sutton Place apartment

complex, and Dorothy recalled that after the Rozelles moved to New York, Jane's problems
increased. “We were invited to breakfast, and she never came out,” said Maule. “They found an
apartment about a street away from where we lived and moved there. I tried being friendly with
her, but on several occasions he just couldn't make her show up. It was a sad story, because she
was a nice person. She couldn't handle the success.” John Lehman int.; Dorothy Maule int.; notfor-attribution int.

When Tex Schramm: Schramm int.
“If I can look”: Anne Marie Bratton (née Rozelle) int. 181 “That convinced him”: Newell int.
In White Collar: C. Wright Mills, White Collar: The American Middle Classes (New York: Oxford

University Press, 1951).

One of the: Like so many others before him, Sabol was charmed by his first meeting with

Rozelle. “He was not at all like what I expected a commissioner would be,” Sabol said. “You
know—huff huff, in and out, lay it down and let's get out. But he was very soft-spoken, had a very

friendly smile” Ed Sabol int.; Alex Ben Block, “The 27th Team,” Today/The Philadelphia Inquirer,
Dec. 10,1972; Mark Kram, Jr., “Steve Sabol Makes History,” Philadelphia Magazine, Sep. 1996;
Tom C. Brady, “C. B. DeMille of the Pros,” SI, Nov. 20, 1967; William Barry Furlong, “Sabol Plays
Film Game into Sports Millions,” Washington Post, May 18,1976.

182 The film about: The World War II vet Sabol had recently seen Darryl Zanuck's film The

Longest Day, about the Normandy invasion; Ed Sabol int.

183 After the screening: Ed Sabol int. 183 Sabol held: Ibid.
183 The Rams’ partnership: On March 13, 1959, Kent sent a proposal to Rozelle, which

opened: “We believe that PROFESSIONAL FOOTBALL offers the most exciting potential for brand
name licensing that exists on the American scene. We believe if the program we propose is

started in 1960 that within a three or four year period it can exceed the volume of business we
now enjoy with ROY ROGERS. We also believe that we are uniquely suited to do this job in such

a manner that in addition to making money for each of the twelve league members it will reflect

credit on everyone involved and will become the strongest promotional force outside of
television for each team.” Larry Kent letter to Pete Rozelle, March 13,1959, Rozelle papers.

Bert Bell had lilted: Halas, back in the ‘30s, had agreed to license the Bears’ helmet logo on

one of the first bobble-head dolls in football with David Warsaw's nascent Bobbie Company;
James Warsaw int.; Atkin int.

The ambitious project: A statement in early 1961 showed $31,948 in royalties and $95,009

in expenses. NFL Properties balance sheet, 1961, Rozelle papers; 1963 NFL Properties Catalog.
184 “We wanted fans”: Carothers int.

184 Kent was the can-do president: Don Smith, “Dave Boss Pioneer Award Winner,” Pro

Football Hall of Fame, news release, No. 10, July 1,1992.

186 “Pierre,” said: Salinger int.; Salinger, P.S.: A Memoir.
186 Through Salinger: Cardinals owner Stormy Bidwill, in town early for the team's game

against the Giants, stopped by the NFL offices later that afternoon, like the rest of the league,
seeking answers from Rozelle. “He was shaken, he was sad, like we all were,” said Bidwill. “But

he was also thinking in terms of’ What do we do.’ He said,’You know, Stormy, the president was
very sports-minded and I wonder if he wouldn't want the world to continue and not be going into
mourning forever.’ ” Bidwill int.; Salinger int.

186 “It has been”: NFL press release, Nov. 22, 1963.
186 At five o'clock: Rosenthal, Fifty Faces of Football, p. 92.
While the AFL: Charles McCabe, “Czar Rozelle Whammied,” “The Fearless Spectator” column,

San Francisco Chronicle, Jan. 3,1964.

On Saturday morning: Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days, p. 86.
187 But the games: Modellini.; Weiss int.; Daly and O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle, p. 191.

187 In the visitors'locker room: Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days, pp. 86-87. 187 In his biography:

Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 352. 187 In the press box: Rosenthal, Fifty Faces of
Football, pp. 93-94.

187 Even in the wake: Stanley Cohen, The Man in the Crowd: Confessions of a Sports

Addict(New York: Random House, 1981), p. 118.

188 After the stirring: Ibid., pp. 118-20. 188 Joe Pollack: Pollack int.
188 Norman Mailer: Plimpton int.
CBS decided not: Rozelle, in fact, briefly tried to get CBS to pay for the weekend's games,

arguing that the NFL had done its part by playing the games. But after a shocked, angry response
from CBS, he let the matter drop. Not-for-attribution ints.
“I just don't think”: Ethel Kennedy int.
189 Despite the criticism: MacCambridge, The Franchise, p. 127.
190 A week later: Curran, The $400,000 Quarterback, pp. 93-94.
190 The talk prompted: Gillman int.
190 The coda: Günther and Carter, Monday Night Mayhem, pp. 16-17.

190 Rozelle instructed: Johnson, Super Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians, p. 125.
“Pete was always cool”: Frank int.
MacPhail recalled: Johnson, Super Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians, p. 125. 191 The

circumstances surrounding: Ibid., p. 126.

191 Decades later: Summerall had remembered that CBS's Bill Paley was in the Cayman

Islands; William Oscar Johnson's account, in his book Super Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians,
had Paley at a meeting the day before the bids were made. Summerall int.; ibid., p. 125.

191 Reaching Rozelle: Modell int.; Johnson, Super Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians, p. 125.
192 Over the next decade: Peter Hadhazy int.; Don Weiss int. 192 Even baseball: Patterson,

Grand Expectations, p. 333.

192 Gabe Paul: Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, p. 140.
11: WAR
193 With the record-breaking: Stephen Mahoney, “Pro Football's Profit Explosion,” Fortune,

Nov. 1964.

195 “I remember Paul Brown”: Dawson int.
“Aftera while”: Murray Chass, Power Football (New York: Dutton, 1973), p. 161.
They chose: Hank Stram and Lou Sahadi, They're Playing My Game (New York: Morrow, 1986),

p. 66.

196 “Once Buck went first”: Robinson int.
A year later: Wells int.; Younger int.; Klosterman interview transcript, Rebels with a Cause

documentary, HBO.

“The Vikings”: Bobby Bell int.
197 With the Chargers slumping: Some of the media that covered the title game still couldn't

resist the baseball metaphor (“Triple in 11th Wins it for Texans” was the headline in the Dallas

Times-Herald. Dick Connor, Great Teams Great Years: Kansas City Chiefs (New York: Macmillan,
1974), p. 22.

197 Though the Texans: Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days, p. 51.
Hunt's attention: At the invitation of Kansas City mayor H. Roe Bartle, Hunt secretly flew in

with Jack Steadman, and as they went around meeting local businessmen, the two men referred
to themselves as Mr. Lamar and Jack X.

Len Dawson: Michael MacCambridge, “Without Them, We're Wichita,” TSN, Aug. 11,1997.
Dallas, Denver: Oakland Raiders Media Guide; Ryczek, Crash of the Titans, p. 222; Curran, The

$400,000 Quarterback, p. 127.

A Chargers-Titans game: Ryczek, Crash of the Titans, pp. 283, 290.
199 Only a $40,000 bailout: When the Titans filed for bankruptcy in February 1963, they

showed some debts dating all the way back to 1960. They hadn't paid East Stroudsburg State

Teachers College a $20,000 training camp bill, they owed the AFL $255,000, the Irving Trust
more than $400,000. Ryczek, Crash of the Titans, pp. 287-88.

199 The situation looked: Lamar Hunt, untitled personal recollections of early days of AFL,

Kansas City Chiefs archives.

199 Sonny was: Curran, The $400,000 Quarterback, p. 150.
199 In 1965: Ibid., p. 138.
On April 15,1963:Pattern, Razzie Dazzle, pp. 84-85; Zimmerman, The Last Season of Weeb

Ewbank, p. 36.

After playing one last season:“The AFL: From Kansas City Lamar to Broadway Joe,” Pro!

Magazine, undated.

200 Each of the 3,500 children: Curran, The $400,000 Quarterback, p. 142.
200 On AM radio: Ibid., p. 144.
200 By 1964: Ramos int.; Knox int.
200 As the Giants’: Wellington Mara int.
200 By the time: NBC had agreed to a deal provided that 1) the deal was signed by midnight

the next Monday, January 27, and 2) no word be leaked to ABC. But JoeFoss hadn't earned the
Congressional Medal of Honor for his backroom deals. So at 5:00 p.m. that Monday afternoon, he
took a break from the meeting with NBC and their lawyers, and called ABC's Tom Moore from a

pay phone outside the Time Life Building. Foss met Moore there, at the corner of 50th Street and
Sixth Avenue, and showed him the pending NBC contract under a streetlight. Moore called ABC

chief Leonard Goldenson, who said there was no way ABC could match the money. Foss, satisfied
that he'd given a chance to the network that had kept the AFL alive during its early years,
returned to the NBC offices and signed the deal. Patton, Razzie Dazzle, pp. 88-89; Johnson, Super
Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians, pp. 133-35.

201 Around NFL circles: Dan Rooney int.; Bidwill int. 201 At the beginning: Natali, Brown's

Town, p. 459.

201 And yet, somehow: Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, p. 67; Slone, Football's

Gentle Giant, pp. 19,142-43,150, 156.

The biggest change: Collier had compensated for his almost total deafness by an acute

observational eye for detail, not just lipreading but body language and, in football, an ability to
break down the game at virtually every position to its fundamental components. “I remember an

exchange he had with a receiver in a film session one time,” said Browns defensive end Bill
Glass. “Blanton said, ‘You weren't looking at the ball, you were looking at the defender.’ And the

receiver had no comment. Blanton asked him, ‘Do you remember what you were looking at?’ The

receiver said, ‘No, I don't.’ Blanton said, ‘Look at the film,’ and he ran it back. The receiver still
had not commented. Blanton said, ‘Watch the stripe on your helmet and you can see what you

were looking at if your eyes were open.’ At the last second, the stripe on the helmet bobbed away

from the approaching ball and at the defender. Blanton showed the receiver in stop-action, one

frame at a time … you could see the stripe on the helmet move just a fraction right before the
ball arrived, thus making the receiver miss the pass.” Slone, Football's Gentle Giant, pp.
39,153,261.

“One of the reasons”: On the eve of games, Ryan and the offensive linemen would meet to go

over blocking schemes. Then Dick Schafrath and John Wooten, representing the offensive line,

would meet in Jim Brown's room to discuss the play list. “The three of us would talk over the
plays, maybe pick six of them that we were sure would work well for the running game that
week,” said Schafrath. “Then I'd take those plays to Frank Ryan.” Jim Brown int.; Pluto, When All
the World Was Browns Town, p. 76.

202 “They don't invite us”: Brown and Delsohn, Out of Bounds, p. 57.
In the 1964 title game: Unitas and Fitzgerald, The Johnny Unitas Story, p. 109.
In Palm Springs: Mike Brown int.
As far back as the ‘20s: Harvey Pollack, “Bell of the NFL,” Sportfolio, Jan. 1948.
Secure phone connections: By the early ‘60s, Mickey Dukich, the Rams’ cinematographer,

began shooting game film with an anamorphic lens, to provide a wider angle for game film.
Dukich int.; “85 Innovations,” Forbes, Dec. 23,2002; P. K. Macker and Co. brochure.
204 Frustrated during: Schramm int.; St. John, Tex!, p. 218.
Very quickly: Ibid., p. 263.; Brandt int.
Computers were: Schramm int.; Brandt int.; Spadia int.; Quereishi int.
And besides: Tex Maule, “Make No Mistakes About It,” SI, Jan. 29, 1968.
By the fall: The computer read: NAMATHJOE QB ALABAMA 803
BUTKUS, DICK LB ILLINOIS 854
SAYERS, GALE HB KANSAS 851
BILETNIKOFF, FRED WR FLORIDA STATE 776
CURTIS, MIKE LB DUKE 801 Though his raw score wasn't as high, Namath came out on top of

the particular list because of the added value placed on elite quarterbacks. As Quereishi would
explain later, “Namath rates ahead … because he had qualities that were held in particularly

high esteem by this model…. On another model with another set of requirements, Butkus or
Sayers may have come first.” Brandt, understandably proud of the Cowboys’ accomplishments,
was ambivalent about what the “real” first printout said, because there were a variety of master
lists with different weights and measures. But Maule's story in 5/ in 1968 was accurate,

according to Schramm. Maule, “Make No Mistakes About It;” Quereishi int.; Schramm int.;
Brandt int.; Aaron Latham, ”The Cowboys, the Indian, and the Computer That Fumbled,” Texas
Monthly, Sep. 1986.

206 Al Davis was still: Davis interview transcript, Rebels with a Cause documentary.
“Well, George Mira's”: Ramos int.
“No one actually”: Ibid.
The contract, in detail: From Ed Krzemienski's unpublished biography of Joe Namath,

contract first reported by Dick Young of the New York Daily News, later reproduced in Martin
Ralbovsky, The Namath Effect (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1976), pp. 16-17.
On January 2,1965: Gruver, History of the AFL, p. 141.

208 If they had overspent: Zimmerman, The Last Season of Weeb Ewbank, pp. 250-51; Robert

H. Boyle, “Show-Biz Sonny and His Quest for Stars,” 5/, July 19, 1965; Ramos int.
208 “With that kind of salary”: Curran, The $400,000 Quarterback, p. 151.

208 “A year earlier”: Jerry Izenberg, “And Wearing White Shoes …” Pro! Magazine, Sep. 20,

1976.

After the loss of players: Rose int.
Rozelle asked Reeves: Larry Felser, “War Games,” Pro! Magazine, Sep. 9, 1979.
209 By November 1964: The brochure sent to NFL field reps noted, “A single change or

addition seldom is the complete solution to a problem. However, we feel strongly that the

addition of just one major sales technique not presently pursued by the National Football League
… would substantially strengthen our signing position with any player a member team of the
league might select…. If we are to successfully compete in the signing field, the players we draft

must, insofar as possible, be mentally conditioned to the advantages the NFL can offer before the

time of the selection meeting.” Kasper int.; Brochure for NFL Representatives, undated, pp. 1-2,
Frank Kasper collection.

The jobs offered: Rozelle letter to John Commeford, June 8, 1990, Rozelle papers.
“Sayers, in fact”: Stram and Sahadi, They're Playing My Game, pp. 76-77.
Decades later: Klosterman interview transcript, Rebels with a Cause documentary.
“Just tell Otis”: Wells int. 211 “You don't come”: Ibid.
211 As soon as they: From the hotel they went to Love Field, where they arrived at 4:45.

Pulling the car up to the terminal, Wells became suspicious of two men at the Braniff gate and,

fearing they were NFL reps waiting to intercept their prey, drove on to the Fort Worth airport,

where he, Taylor, and Cartwright caught a 7:45 plane to Kansas City. Klosterman interview
transcript, Rebels with a Cause documentary; Wells int.; Dick Kaplan, “The Undercover War in Pro
Football,” Sport, Aug. 1966; Hurd int.

211 The New York Times's Bill Wallace: William Wallace, “The Decision,” Sports of the

Times, NYT, Jan. 14, 1965.

With his slicked-back hair: Ribowsky, Slick, pp. 148,150.
As the civil war: It was true that the edge enjoyed by football was tenuous and somewhat

circumstantial at that point. Football's edge over baseball was scant, 41 percent to 38 percent
among sports fans asked to name their favorite sport. Some of the fans who'd named football

their favorite sport were obviously more avid college fans than pro fans. And some of the
advantage surely was seasonal; the same question in a survey six months earlier had shown a 38

percent to 25 percent advantage for baseball. But beneath that slender edge there were volumes
of information indicating that pro football's popularity was still rising. More than 40 percent of

sports fans described themselves as “more interested” in pro football than they had been a few
years earlier. “By far the most important and sustained drawing card in all sports today” the

report noted, “are the televised games of the National Football League.” Nearly half of all sports
fans said they watched nearly every game on television, 40 percent said they wanted more TV
doubleheaders, and 55 percent said they'd be willing to watch a game during prime-time hours.

Louis Harris, “A Study of the Effectiveness of the Television Broadcasting of National Football
League Games,” Rozelle papers. 212 “Wethought”: Modell int.
1 2: A SEPARATE PEACE
214 That fine-grained attention: Schramm int.
The buildup: Adams int.; Felser, “War Games.”
More than 300 players: Frank Kasper, a Chicago printing salesman brought into the program

by George Halas's son Muggsie, had worked the previous year's draft, but met his prospect,

Purdue tight end Ed Flanagan, just two days before the draft. In 1965, by comparison, Kasper
contacted Purdue lineman Jerry Shay in the summer, had Shay and his girlfriend over for dinner

in July, dined with his parents in August, and attended two Purdue games during the season.
Shay was the seventh player taken in the 1966 draft, and signed with the Vikings that weekend.
Kasper int.; Weiss int.; John R. McDermott, “’Draft Central,’ N.F.L.’s Secret HQ,” Life, Dec. 10,
1965.

215 Baby-sitters were: Brandt int.
When the time came: Schramm int.; Frank Luksa, “War & Peace,” Petersen's Annual Pro

Football: 1970; Tim Cowlishaw, “Segregation Among Obstacles That Failed to Deter Schramm,”
Dallas Morning News, July 22, 1991; Schramm testimony, Yazoo Smith case, No. 1643-70, p. 83.

“It was all so costly”: Herskowitz, “A Lion in Winter,” in A Game of Passion, Wiebusch and

Silverman, eds., p. 33.

216 “It was hard for me”: Cowlishaw, “Segregation Among Obstacles That Failed to Deter

Schramm.”

The negotiations toward: Schramm int.; Hunt int.; Wilson int.
In virtually every:“Reeves loved to go for walks,” recalled Jack Teele. “On more than one

occasion, we'd be out for a walk, and he'd say, ‘You ever thought of Phoenix? Ever thought of
living in Phoenix?’ And this was during that time. ‘Nice place to raise your children.’ So he was
thinking about it, and he told me he would be willing to do it.” Teele int.; Schramm int.; Luksa,
“War & Peace.”

217 Furthermore: Carothers int.
So before making: Spadia int.
“I suppose”: Schramm int.
218 “This is a horseshit town”: MacCambridge, “Without Them, We're Wichita.”
218 Hank Stram would: Stram and Sahadi, They're Playing My Game, p. 79.
218 A tragedy finally brought: Ibid., p. 85; McGuff, Winning It All, p. 100.
218 Though Hunt still lived: Tex Maule, “On with the Golden Game,” SI, Sep. 15, 1966.
219 OnApril4: Hunt int.; Schramm int. 219 Once inside: Schramm int.; Hunt int.
For its new commissioner: Edwin Shrake, “After Foss: A Hotter Pro War,” 5/, Apr. 18, 1966;

Ribowsky, Slick, p. 162; William Wallace, “ ‘War’ Declared on AFL's Rival,” NYT, Apr. 29, 1966.
“I've been called”: Wolf int.

220 For nearly seven years: Mara informed Rozelle of the signing a day or two before the

meeting and recalled that the commissioner “had no comment.” Mara int.
221 Down near the end: Spadia int.
221 “This is a disgrace!”: Dan Rooney int.
“Goddamnit”: Modell int.; Bidwill int.

Davis leaned back: Davis int.; interview transcript, Rebels with a Cause documentary. 222

Davis's aide: Wolf int.

222 Davis returned: Arthur Daley, “Act of Provocation?” Sports of the Times, NYT, May 19,

1966.

222 Within twenty-four hours:“There was nothing illegal about what the Giants did,”

pointed out Davis's aide Scotty Stirling, who'd succeeded Davis as the Raiders’ GM, but was also
closely involved with war planning. “But we felt it gave us the moral wedge to go out and
encourage a few people in their league to consider the same course.” Jerry Izen-berg, The Rivals
(New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1968), p. 120; Davis int.; interview transcript, Rebels with
a Cause documentary.

Nearly forty years later: Davis int.
On the afternoon: Spadia int.
223 “It was bad”: Mara int.; Spadia int.
223 “The only teams”: Bidwill int.
223 As the meeting ended: Schramm int.
Arriving at Rozelle's suite: Ibid.; St. John, Tex!, pp. 276-77.
Schramm waited in silence: Schramm int.
224 The next morning: In his later years, Schramm asserted that prior to the meeting on May

20, he had in hand an agreement from Hunt that the AFL would move both the Jets and the

Raiders. Hunt said he had no recollection of that, and since they are the only two men who know

the truth, it is impossible to know whether this was the case. The problem with Schramm's
assertion—“my intent was always for the Jets and Raiders to move” —is that the rest of
Schramm's story makes less sense. In his recollections of the time, and the contemporaneous 5/

story penned with Tex Maule, Schramm recalls that Mara in New York and Spadia in San
Francisco were reluctant. But if they were faced with a plan in which the competition was

moving out of town, there is no explanation for their reluctance. What's clear is that at some
point, either in 1966 or earlier in 1965, there was serious discussion about the Jets moving to
Los Angeles. Schramm int.; Jack Landry, Jr., int.; T. D. Werblin int.
224 At that point: St. John, Tex!, pp. 276-78.
On May23: Roman Gabriel, Player of the Year: Roman Gabriel's Football Journal (New York:

World, 1970), p. 107.

At Davis's behest: Spadia int.; Brodie, Open Field, p. 118-31.
225 “John”: John Brodie and James D. Houston, Open Field (San Francisco: Houghton Mifflin,

1974). 225 “The AFL agrees”: Adams int.
When Spadia got: Spadia int.

“And so here it is,”: Schramm int. 226 Klosterman called Davis: Davis int.
226 Davis then called: Davis int.; Hunt int.; Bidwill int.; Spadia int.
Hunt returned: Hunt int.; Schramm int.; Schramm, “Here's How It Happened.”
Hunt flew: Werblin int.; Hunt int.

227 “I wanted a merger”: Davis interview transcript, Rebels with a Cause. 227 Later that

night: Hunt int.; Weiss int.; Carothers int.

The press release: NFL press release, June 8, 1966; Hadhazy int.; Weiss int.; Browne int.
After sending: Al Stump, “Pete Rozelle: Czar Between the Goal Posts,” Los Angeles Herald

Examiner Sunday Magazine, Nov. 2, 1969.

228 Furious, MacPhail demanded: Stump, “Pete Rozelle: Czar Between the Goal Posts;”

Powers, Supertube, p. 179.

As news of the agreement: Pinchbeck int.
Rozelle, seeking a way: Dixon int.
The final approval: Dixon int.
After a rocky courtship: And the upstarts getting equal play would take some getting used to.

At the 1967 draft, the first joint draft between the leagues, many of the combatants in the

subversive intrigue of the war years expressed some wistfulness for the old days. And on that
afternoon, former baby-sitter Jack Landry walked into the conference room where the selection

meeting was being held, and from the back of the room called out to Rozelle, “Hey, I've got a

half dozen guys from Michigan State stashed in a hotel room in Yonkers. What do you want me
to do with them?” Felser, “The War Years.”
13: “THE ONLY THING”
“There is”: Vince Lombardi, Run to Daylight! (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1963), p.

17.

Jerry Kramer: Curry would complain that the statement he heard “got bastardized into:

‘Winning's not everything—it's the only thing.’ I don't like that as much. That doesn't say it as
well as the way I first learned it.” George Plimpton and Bill Curry, One More July: A Football

Dialogue with Bill Curry (New York: Harper & Row, 1977), p. 124; Jerry Kramer, Instant Replay:
The Green Bay Diary of Jerry Kramer (New York: World, 1968), p. 50.
232 After hearing: Kramer, Instant Replay, p. 196.
Iconoclastic Cowboys: Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes, pp. 230-31.
Landry understood: Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days, pp. 76-77.
But Papa Bear: Wiebusch, Lombardi, p. 27.
“We're midshipmen”: In his reminiscence of the encounter, Allen relates that when he and his

friend left, Einstein gave them a word of encouragement. “You boys ought to know, the war will
end soon,” he said, and then with his hands spread added, “A great boom.” George Allen,

Strategies for Winning: A Top Coach's Game Plan for Victory in Football and in Life (New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1990), pp. 29-30.

234 Allen vowed: Jennifer Allen int.; Etty Allen int.; William Gildea and Kenneth Turan, The

Future Is Now: George Allen, Pro Football's Most Controversial Coach (Boston: Houghton Mifflin,
1972), p. 38.

As devoted to: Gildea and Turan, The Future Is Now, p. 42; Jennifer Allen, Fifth Quarter: The

Scrimmage of a Football Coach's Daughter (New York: Random House, 2000), p. 55.

Allen had been: Faulkner int.; Dukich int.; Schramm int.; Gildea and Turan, The Future Is Now,

p. 139.

235 On his desk: Allen, Fifth Quarter, pp. 23, 95; George Allen and Joe Marshall, “A Hundred

Percent Is Not Enough,” SI, July 9,1973.

235 Dan Reeves: Teele int; Hamilton Maule, The Pro Season (Garden City NY: Doubleday,

1970), p. 17.

236 In that 1966 season: Gildea and Turan, The Future Is Now, p. 90. 236 Some of his peers:

Ibid., p. 177.

236 Shortly after: Formal plans couldn't even begin until the antitrust exemption was secured

in late October, and Rozelle's original hope to play the game at Pasadena's Rose Bowl was

rebuffed by the Tournament of Roses Committee and representatives from the Big Ten and
Pacific Eight conferences. So it wasn't until December 1 that the official decision was reached

approving the Los Angeles Coliseum as the site for the first game. All of which meant that the

league would have six weeks to organize and stage a game that would, in the future, require
years of planning. Don Weiss int.; undated correspondence with Don Weiss, Rozelle papers.
236 “Should there be”: Hunt int.; Weiss int.
There were smiles: At the Pro Football Hall of Fame, the Super Ball on display is said to

belong to his daughter Sharron. But Hunt insisted, during recent interviews, that each of his
children received a ball, purchased by his wife, Norma. Hunt int.
“But nobody ever said”: Hunt int.
237 Hunt sent: Hunt letter to Rozelle, July 25,1966, Rozelle papers.

237 Rozelle agreed: Weiss also recalled that Rozelle would “say things like, ‘That's not right,

that's correct.’ It was a part of him you didn't see very often but you'd say, you know, your
natural reaction to something. ‘That's right’ or, ‘Is that right?’ He'd say, ‘I don't know if that is

right or not, but it is correct.’ I think that probably had something to do with [his dislike for the
term'super.’” Weiss int.

237 Yet even before: When the Chiefs beat the Buffalo Bills on New Year's Day, the headline

in the next day's Kansas City Star read “Chiefs Are Super Bowl Bound.” Kansas City Star, Jan. 2,
1967; Hunt int.; Hunt letter to Rozelle; NFL Films Hidden Treasures, Episode I: Super Bowls I—IV;
Weiss int.

There was a curious dichotomy: Patton, Razzie Dazzle, p. 99.
Television itself:History of the Super Bowl, Volume 1: Featuring Super Bowls I Through IV, NFL

Properties souvenir magazine published for McDonald's; Connor, Great Teams Great Years: Kansas
City Chiefs, pp. 76-79; The Wild Ride to Super Bowl I, HBO documentary, 2004.

The 1966 season: Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes, pp. 322-27.
“Thank you”: Marty Ralbovsky, Super Bowl: Of Men, Myths and Moments (New York:

Hawthorn, 1971), p. 10; Wells Twombly, “Follow the Bouncing Super Bowl,” Super Bowl VII
program, pp. 17-18.

239 The clear storyline: The Chiefs were overrun with press in that week in L.A. prior to the

game. Lombardi's Packers were hidden away ninety miles to the north in Santa Barbara, and all

but unavailable for comment even when writers did go to their practices. Meanwhile, the Chiefs
—as the upstart outsider—had tried to be as accommodating as possible. Dawson, so mobbed

with reporters that he found it difficult to eat meals, recalled “it seemed as if somebody was

constantly calling or talking about strategy and possible game plans and predictions. Looking
back on it now, what we should have done was to shut them all off.” Len Dawson and Lou
Sahadi, Len Dawson: Pressure Quarterback (New York: Cowles, 1970), p. 97; Stram and Sahadi,
They're Playing My Game, p. 93.

For all that: Rozelle recollections in correspondence with Don Weiss; John Wiebusch, “Q&A,”

GameDay magazine, Vol. 20, No. 3, 1989.

He did give:The Wild Ride to Super Bowl I documentary.
240 Before the pregame introductions: Connor, Great Teams Great Years: Kansas City Chiefs,

p. 74. 240 By the 1:00 p.m.: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 394.

The scene at halftime: Ray Didinger, The Super Bowl: Celebrating a Quarter Century of

America's Greatest Game (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990), p. 48.
In the Packers'locker room: Ibid.

241 “It was over then”: Strother, NFL Top 40, p. 79; Didinger, The Super Bowl, p. 50. 241

After the game: Didinger, The Super Bowl, p. 52.

241 When asked to assess: Horriganand Rathet, The Other League, p. 153;McGuff, Winning It

All, p. 184.

It was typical: Later on, when Tex Schramm saw Lamar Hunt's wife, Norma, he said, “Now

you see what we've been living with all these years.” McGuff, Winning It All, p. 186; Stram and
Sahadi, They're Playing My Game, p. 97; Will McDonough, “Gate-Crashers and Frog's Legs,” in A
Game of Passion, Wiebusch and Silverman, eds., p. 410.
The next morning: Modell int.; Mara int.

The details ofthat: Gregg int.; Walt Garrison, Once a Cowboy (New York: Random House,

1988), p. 184; Strother, NFL Top 40, pp. 85-89.

On the Cowboys’: Garrison, Once a Cowboy, p. 85.
243 In the CBS booth: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 420.
Atfirst: Ibid., p.417.
With sixteen seconds: Ibid., p. 424. 244 It is easy to forget: Summerall int. 244 But they did

score: Gregg int.

244 Inside the locker rooms: Kramer, Instant Replay, p. 217.
245 “There's a great deal”: Ibid.
245 By the end of the year: Ibid., back cover of paperback edition; Dick Schaap, Flashing

Before My Eyes: 50 Years of Headlines, Datelines and Punchlines (New York: Morrow, 2001), p. 149.
It would all feed back: Powers, Supertube, pp. 67-68.

“Football requires”: Lee Iacocca, “The Lesson I Learned from Vince Lombardi,” in A Game of

Passion, Wiebusch and Silverman, eds., p. 106.

246 By 1968: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 446. 246 “And here he is”: Teele int.
“Men want to follow”: Wiebusch, Lombardi, p. 98; Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 398;

Iacocca, “The Lesson I Learned from Vince Lombardi,” in A Game of Passion, Wiebusch and
Silverman, eds., p. 101.

“Everyone was important”: Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 224.
14: RESPECT
248 That first Super Bowl: Edwin Shrake, “Still a Long, Rough Road Ahead for the AFL,” 5/,

Jan. 30, 1967.

248 The AFL's next: On August 23,1967, in front of a sellout crowd of 33,041 at Municipal

Stadium in Kansas City for their first interleague preseason game, against the Chicago Bears, still

coached by George Halas and thus the embodiment of the NFL's old guard. The Bears were an
unsuspecting football team caught in the wrong place at the wrong time. Unable to adapt to the
frequent shifts on offense, the Bears came unglued in the second quarter, when Kansas City

exploded for 32 points. The Chiefs maintained their intensity in the second half, and added 13
points in the last two minutes of the game. The final score sent a message heard throughout the
NFL: Kansas City 66y Chicago 24.

But the game wasn't just an ambush. In addition to providing some measure of the team's and

league's frustration, it hinted at some of the AFL's technical accomplishments. Stram started more

plays out of the tight I formation, with tight end Fred Arbanas lining up in a string of three backs
behind quarterback Len Dawson. The Bears’ defense was geared toward mirroring the strength of

the offense, with weak-side and strong-side designations for linebackers, cornerbacks, and

safeties; by delaying revealing the strong side, the Chiefs forced Chicago to move six defenders
every time Arbanas went into motion to take his spot in the line. Defensively, the Chiefs had

shored up the left side of their defense, forcing four turnovers and dominating the line of
scrimmage.

After the game, Lamar Hunt came to the Bears’ dressing room. George Halas spotted him from

across the room and said, “Lamar, have mercy on us. You really buried us.” Halas was respectful
and not bitter. As the coach once on the winning end of a 73-0 score, he wasn't about to ask for

any quarter from an opponent. “They gave every evidence that they were as good as any team,”
Halas said. “They were fired up and played with great spirit. They went 100 percent on every
play.”

In the Chiefs’ locker room, Hunt was awarded a game ball, along with the other three figures

who'd received most of the criticism for the Super Bowl loss: Stram, Dawson (who threw four
touchdown passes against the Bears), and cornerback Willie Mitchell.; Stram int.; Dawson int.;
Stram and Sahadi, They're Playing My Game, pp. 104-5; Dawson, Pressure Quarterback, p. 104;
McGuff, Winning It All, pp. 187-90.
The common belief: Weiss int.
The new league: Levy, Tackling Jim Crow, p. 141; Kemp int.
The repeated epithets: Dixon int.

A day later: As the Watts riots dominated the news the following summer, the Chiefs had their

own racial incident. A black defensive back named Ron Fowlkes tangled with a white player

named Doc Griffith, breaking his nose during a scrimmage. The next morning, Fowlkes attacked
Griffith at a team breakfast, breaking his jaw in the process. In the context of the tension of the

times, it was a potentially explosive situation. But after having worked for years to avoid any
racial divisions, Stram chose to release both players, a move applauded by his team. McGuff,

Winning It All, pp. 95-97. 250 The Chiefs'white linebacker: Zimmerman, The Last Season of

Weeb Ewbank, p. 62. 250 Later that year: Harris int. 250 Into this cultural maelstrom:
MacCambridge, ESPN SportsCentury, p. 190.

Broadway Joe: Dan Jenkins, “Sweet Life of Swinging Joe,” 5/, Oct. 17, 1966.
But there was something: Brown and Delsohn, Out of Bounds, p. 100.
No one accused Namath: Zimmerman, The Last Season of Weeb Ewbank, p. 63; Ramos int.
While players: Namath, I Can't Wait for Tomorrow, p. 108.
252 Two things quickly: MacCambridge, ESPN SportsCentury, p. 202; Johnson, Super Spectator

and the Electric Lilliputians, pp. 180-81,233.

The headline:Pattern, Razzie Dazzle, p. 91.

After the Colts’: Jack Orr, We Came of Age: A Picture History of the American Football League

(New York: Lion, 1969), p. 23.

253 The Colts were favored: William Wallace, “Rozelle Indicates Tomorrow's Super Bowl

Contest Could Be Next to Last,” NYT, Jan. 11,1969. 253 The next day:“Pro! Data, Behind the
Editorial Scenes,” Pro! Magazine, Vol. 7, No. 6, Sep.
20, 1976.
Namath attended: Dave Anderson, Countdown to Super Bowl (New York: Random House,

1969), p. 163.

Namath looked:Rebels with a Cause documentary; Ramos int.; Namath, I Can't Wait for

Tomorrow, p. 58; Anderson, Countdown to Super Bowl, p. 163.

254 Word of Namath's: Jerry Izenberg, “And Wearing White Shoes …” Pro! Magazine, Vol. 7,

No. 6, Sep. 20, 1976; McDonough, “Gate-Crashers and Frog's Legs,” in A Game of Passion,
Wiebuschand Silverman, eds., p. 411.

254 In the Jets’: McDonough, “Gate-Crashers and Frog's Legs,” in A Game of Passion,

Wiebuschand Silverman, eds., p. 411.

From early on: Ralbovsky, Super Bowl, p. 98.
Up in the press box: Summerall int.
255 As the clock: Ramos int.; Anderson, Countdown to Super Bowl, p. 237. 255 Namath would

later: Lanier int.; Rebels with a Cause documentary. 255 While the Jets: Hadhazy int.
And in many ways: Plimpton and Curry, One More July, p. 56.

When the recommendation: Paul Brown's letter to the league included a terse analysis of the

merger agreement. In a letter to the other owners, Brown voiced his opposition to retaining the

old alignment: Simple inter-league play does not create new divisions or groupings. What I want

to emphasize is that we're open to any alignment that gives everybody an equal shot at victory
and profits. I'll guarantee you one thing: If the leagues retain their present identities, the NFL will
continue to control the major TV markets and the AFL franchises never will be worth as much. I

don't blame some of the NFL clubs for wanting to keep their cozy little four-team groupings, but
at the time of the merger, when everyone was afraid of going under, the AFL paid dearly.

I don't want to ruin the effect of the Super Bowl. There will always be a Super Bowl, no matter

how it's arrived at…. But if you leave the merger, and allow the NFL to keep sixteen teams, and

the AFL to retain ten teams, the NFL will always be stronger simply because it will have sixteen
of every twenty-six draft picks.

Brown and Clary, PB, pp. 316-17; Weiss and Day, The Making of the Super Bowl, p. 77.
257 Suddenly, every team: Jerry Green, Super Bowl Chronicles: A Sportswriter Reflects on the

First 30 Years of America's Game (Indianapolis: Masters, 1995), p. 43.
257 When the owners: Brown and Clary, PB, p. 318.
257 “Oh, hell”: Rooney int.; Modell int.; Schramm int.
257 “Gentlemen, I have decided”: Modell int.; Rooney int.; Mara int.
258 In the aftermath: Barry Cobb, “Grid Alignment Was Even More than Designer Brown

Expected” TSN, May 31,1969. 258 Others saw: Weiss int.
It would be nearly: Ibid.

The event prompted: William Satire, Before the Fall: An Inside View of the Pre-Watergate White

House (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1975), p. 552; Johnson, Super Spectator and the Electric
Lilliputians, p. 136.

259 Nicholas would later: Dr. James Nicholas int.
On June 26:“That was one of the few times,” she'd remember later, “that I didn't do what I

was told to do, and didn't get in trouble for it.” Anne Bratton (née Rozelle) int; Namath, I Can't
Wait, pp. 34-38.

As a guest: Undated videotape of Mike Douglas Show, Anne Marie Bratton (née Rozelle)

collection.

By the summer Oé The screenwriter James Toback, upon traveling to Los Angeles to interview
the retired Jim Brown in 1968, smartly captured the change in the wind: “Football had displaced
baseball as the leading national sport. Boys of eight and nine in Topeka, Boise, Memphis, Buffalo,

and San Francisco now dreamed of becoming Brown or Lance Rentzel or Gale Sayers; boys whose

fathers thirty-five years earlier had imagined themselves Babe Ruth, Ty Cobb, or Christy

Mathewson. Construction workers, call girls, politicians, actors, students, stockbrokers talked
about the Jets and the Raiders, the Chiefs, Lions, Chargers, and Browns, with authentic
enthusiasm; rarely exhibiting more than moderate interest in the other sports filling the

American year. Baseball had become slow and dull except at the end of a season in a tight
pennant race or World Series…. Only football constituted a full and satisfactory transformation
of energy.” James Toback, Jim: James Toback's Self-Centered Memoir of the Great Jim Brown, p. 12.

261 “Football is not only”: William Phillips, “A Season in the Stands,” Commentary, July

1969. 261 “Up until now”: Smith, Voices of the Game, p. 302. 261 This perception: Ibid., pp.
300-301.

In a Sports Illustrated article: Johnson, Super Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians, p. 108.
Both sports: Thomas Morgan, “American War Game,” Esquire, Oct. 1965.
262 The most vivid: George Carlin, Brain Droppings (New York: Hyperion, 1997), pp. 51-53.
262 “I have found”: The Cold War rhetoric and football's militaristic technology were

complementary. The briefcase full of nuclear launch codes that accompanied the president at all

times was known as “the football,” and the game's terminology—from the blitz to the bomb—
drew deeply from military strategy.

The former Packer Bill Curry saw the movie Patton and was struck by the general's similarity to

Lombardi. The problem, of course, came when coaches or others tried to push the parallel too
far. Ron Wolf, who'd served in military intelligence before joining the personnel department of

the Raiders, found any serious comparison to football and war pure folly. Recalling his days with
Al Davis and the Raiders in the mid-’60s, he remembered, “We used to have it on our itinerary,

it'd say'We Go to War.’ Or, you know, ‘Live Bullets are Flying.’ I keep hearing that all the time.

Well, that's absurd—if live bullets are flying, people are dying. That's a different check on

yourself than this thing. You're more or less pitting your mind against someone else in our game.
You're certainly not committed to life or death.”

Or as Otto Graham, by then coaching the Redskins in the late ‘60s, observed, “Football is like

war without death. If nobody died in battle, people would think that was fun, too.” Wolf int.;

Graham int.; Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered, p. 117; George Plimpton, John Gordy, and Alex
Karras, Mad Ducks and Bears (New York: Random House, 1973), p. 292.

Nowhere was pro: Huff and Shapiro, Tough Stuff, p. 188; Patterson, Grand Expectations, p.

633.

Nixon's devotion: Nixon had made his football career, as a reserve tackle for the Whittier

College Poets, a staple of his biography throughout his political career. A publicity flyer used for
his congressional campaign in 1946 noted, “He played college football (’not too successfully,’ he
says); maintains an intensive interest in sports” Brown and Clary, PB, p. 322; Fawn McKay

Brodie, Richard Nixon: The Shaping of His Character (New York: Norton, 1981), p. 265; James
Keogh, This Is Nixon (New York: Putnam, 1956), p. 26; Mark Harris, Mark the Glove Boy, or the
Last Days of Richard Nixon (New York: Macmillan, 1964), p. 84; Richard Nixon, RN: The Memoirs
of Richard Nixon (New York: Grosset & Dunlap), p. 315.
263 ABC's producer: Arledge, Roone, p. 119.
263 Another former: Merchant, And Every Day You Take Another Bite (Garden City NY: Dou-

bleday 1971), p. 34.

263 Elsewhere on the left: Hoffman compared the unrest surrounding the 1968 Democratic

convention in Chicago to a football game. Ibid., p. 59.

Pro football's appeal: Robert Murchison int.; Burke Murchison int.
“after home victories”: Allen, Fifth Quarter, pp. 69-71. 264 Starting with: Schramm int.;

Susan Reeves int.

264 “Dan Reeves was”: Etty Allen int. 264 Upon firing: Jack Teele int.

After rallying: Maule, The Pro Season, pp. 158-59.
Whatever effect: Gabriel, Player of the Year, p. 214.
At a racially polarized time: not-for-attribution int.
Kansas City headed: Dawson int.; Taylor int.; Stram int.
“The Chiefs would be open”: Madden int.
Instead, the Chiefs: Uncredited, “Vikings Are Made 13-Point Favorite,” NYT, Jan. 7, 1970.

268 “They're doing it again”: Strother, NFL Top 40, p. 79; Didinger, The Super Bowl, p. 105. 268

The Chiefs were spending: According to Huntley-Brinkley: “In Detroit, a special Justice
Department Task Force, conducting what is described as the biggest gambling investigation of its

kind ever, is about to call seven professional players and one college coach to testify on their
relationship with known gamblers. Among the players scheduled to appear is Len Dawson,
quarterback for the Kansas City Chiefs, who will play the Minnesota Vikings in the Super Bowl

this Sunday.” Though only a casual friend to Len Dawson, bookie Donald Dawson was a name
known by NFL investigators. The Detroit restaurant owner had been a friend of Bobby Layne's,

and during Alex Karras's testimony during the 1963 investigation, Karras strongly argued that

Layne had bet on football, through Donald Dawson. Weiss int.; Didinger, The Super Bowl, p. 87.
268 Seven years: Charles Friedman, “Namath, Dawson Reported Among Those to Be Called in
Gambling Inquiry,” NYT, Jan. 7,1970.

With the media: McGuff, Winning It All, p. 250.
Ultimately, that's all: But before he got through the interview, two writers, Moe Siegel of the

Washington Star and Pat Livingston of the Pittsburgh Press, nearly came to blows, with Livingston
strenuously defending the honor of his friend Dawson. Green, Super Bowl Chronicles, pp. 39-40.
269 “He never had”: Strother, NFL Top 40, p. 106.
269 For his part: Robinson int.
269 The day of the game: The pregame festivities lived down to what was becoming a

Murphy's Law of Super Bowl spectacles. Two hot-air balloons were scheduled to take off from the

field of Tulane Stadium prior to the game. The one representing the Vikings became unmoored

and drifted into the stands, crashing into an area occupied by the Sugar Bowl queen and her

court, with one beauty queen suffering a broken leg in the collision. Shelby Strother, “Len's
Nightmare, Len's Dream,” Super Bowl XXXIV program; Jeff Miller, Going Long: The Wild 10-Year

Saga of the Renegade American Football League in the Words of Those Who Lived It (Chicago:
Contemporary, 2003), p. 346; John Garrity, “Parting Shot,” 5/ Presents NFL ‘95; Bill McGrane int.
271 Dawson, vindicated: Dawson int.
271 The short conversation: Actually, Nixon wasn't the first president to place a phone call to

an NFL champion. After the Packers routed the Giants, 37-0, to win the title in 1961, Lombardi

received a call from President Kennedy. The Kennedy call, however, came later in the evening, at

Lombardi's home, and was a private conversation. Klein int.; Maraniss, When Pride Still Mattered,
p. 293.

“Most people”: Steve Sabol int.
The AFL opened: Tex Maule, “Wham, Bam, Stram!“SI, Jan. 19,1970, p. 10.
The ‘60s enterprise: The parallel between football and space exploration had been evident for

more than a decade. When the air force pilot Chuck Yeager was testing the experimental X-l at
Edwards Air Force Base in California in the late ‘40s, he modified a leather football helmet to

wear during flight, to protect him against the jostling that the X-l's pilot often incurred when the

jet reached peak altitudes. Tom Wolfe, The Right Stuff (New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1979),
p. 56.

“American society”: Early int.
274 Like the race: Uncredited, “The Sweep of the ‘60s,” Life, Dec. 26,1969.
1 5: PRIME TIME
From Municipal Stadium:Monday Night Football telecast, Cleveland Browns vs. New York Jets,

ABC, Sep. 20, 1970.

Rozelle had argued: Marc Günther and Bill Carter, Monday Night Mayhem (New York: Beech

Tree, 1988), pp. 26-30.

276 “But we made a deal!”: Arledge, Roone, p. 103.
276 Though Bill McPhail: The Monday night CBS lineup featured Gunsmoke (number two in

the Nielsen ratings in the 1969-70 season), Here's Lucy (number six), Mayberry R.F.D.

(number four), The Doris Day Show (number ten), and The Carol Burnett Show (number

thirteen). Cobbett Steinberg, TV Facts (New York: Facts on File, 1985) p. 108; undated memo,
Rozelle papers.

NBC might have been: Steinberg, TV Facts, pp. 107-08.
With that Rozelle: Arledge, Roone, p. 104.
277 The threat was underscored: Frank int.; Edwin Shrake, “What Are They Doing with the

Sacred Game of Pro Football?,” SI, Oct. 25,1971.

They found out quickly: Jack Gould, “TV Review,” NYT, Sep. 23, 1970; Fred Ferretti,

“Monday Football Displaces Cavett,” NYT, Oct. 8, 1970.

CoselTs brand: With Cosell, even the routine pregame interviews took on a different cast, as

Cosell's reputation as a journalist added an edge to any of the proceedings. Before week two in

Baltimore, with Kansas City visiting the Colts, Cosell spent a few moments on the field
interviewing Len Dawson and John Unitas. After asking Unitas about how his hyper-extended left

knee might affect his play, Cosell noted, “Some of the would-be experts have said you throw the
short one with all the old brilliance, but the ability to throw the long one is no longer there. True
or not true?”

“Well, you'd have to ask the experts,” snapped the unflappable Unitas with a sardonic smile,

prompting laughter even from Cosell. Videotape, Monday Night Football telecast, Baltimore Colts
vs. Kansas City Chiefs Sep. 27, 1970; Myron Cope, “Would You Let This Man Interview You?,” SI,
Mar. 13, 1967.

During one game:Cosell: Telling It like It Is documentary.
The on-air jousting: Günther and Carter, Monday Night Mayhem, p. 103.
By then, Monday Night Football: Ibid., p. 137.
280 Not all of it: On November 8, 1972, the situation comedy The Bob Newhart Show

premiered an episode called “Don't Go to Bed Mad,” in which the Hartleys (Newhart and
Suzanne Pleshette) agreed not to go to sleep until they settled their argument over his football-

watching habits, which went from Saturday afternoons to Monday nights. It was testament to the
cultural pervasiveness of Monday Night Football that The Bob Newhart

Show aired on the competition, CBS. Another sure sign of Monday Night Football's success were

the apoplectic critiques from competitors. “I wince with embarrassment when those guys do a

funny” said Bill MacPhail. “Meredith is like a buffoon, waiting to be cute. Cosell's style is good
for a 15-minute show, but not for an action game. On CBS, the game is the star. ABC has lost
sight of the fact that pro football is a game, not a show for three TV stars. What should we do,

follow them with a team of Don Rickles, Milton Berle and Mickey Rooney?” Günther and Carter,
Monday Night Mayhem, p. 106; William Wallace, “Monday Night Football Hits Paydirt,” NYT, Oct.
25, 1970; Patton, Razzie Dazzle, p. 111.

With the completion: Pete Rozelle, Foreword, 1970 Official National Football League Record

Book.

To minimize: Weiss int.; Schramm int.; Bussert int.
The Raiders, who'd: Wells Twombly Blanda, Alive and Kicking: The Exclusive, Authorized

Biography (Los Angeles: Nash, 1972), pp. 6, 32 54; Michael MacCambridge, “George Blanda, The
Old Man,” ESPN SportsCentury, p. 228.

Later in life: Steve Sabolint.; Ed Sabolint.; Levy, “Fearless Tot from Possum Trot,” 5/, Nov. 22,

1965; Ben Yagoda, “Not So Instant Replay,” NYT Magazine, Dec. 14, 1986.

After the early success: Thomas Danyluk, “Steve Sabol,” The Coffin Corner, Vol. 23, No. 1.
“When we'd get”: Ibid.
283 By then, NFL Films: Tom Brody, “C.B. DeMille of the Pros,” SI, Nov. 20,1967.

“To put it harshly”: Durslag, “They Sell Everything but the Goal Posts.”
In this mission: Alex Ben Block, “The 27th Team,” Today/Philadelphia Inquirer Sunday

Magazine, Dec. 10,1972; Durslag, “They Sell Everything but the Goal Posts.”

285 The opening montage: Yagoda, “Not So Instant Replay.” 285 “It'll be historic”: Stram

int.

“Damn right”: Decades later, long after he'd left coaching, Stram would still see strangers in

airports who would quote him, urging him to “Call 65 Toss Power Trap” or “Keep matriculating
that ball down the field!” John Garrity, “Parting Shot,” 5/ Presents NFL ‘95; Paul Zimmerman,
“Frisked and Fleeced in New Orleans,” Dr. Z's Mailbag, CNNSI.com, Feb. 6, 2002; Dawson
quotation as related by HBO's Ross Greenburg, Greenburg int.
The NFL Films:Mayhem on a Sunday documentary, 1964.
286 “We are not journalists”: Mark Kram, Jr., “Steve Sabol Makes History,” Philadelphia, Sep.
1996; Yagoda, “Not So Instant Replay.” 286 By 1970: Myslenski, “Q&A,” Pro! Magazine,

undated; Block, “The 27th Team,” Smith, Voices of the Game, p. 304.

286 The Sabols’ imprimatur: As the reach of NFL Films spread, so did its impact. It wasn't all

hero worship; young producer Phil Tuckett shot the documentary Pottstown, USA, about the
Pottstown Firebirds semipro football team, which aired on Super Bowl Sunday in 1971, and

earned numerous awards. Tuckett was just one of an exemplary cast of film makers that were on

the staff. The premier cameraman was probably Ernie Ernst, the man whose rock-steady hands

with a super-slow-motion camera were most likely to capture the graceful spinning of a spiral in
flight. Ernst's eye was so keen, that he was the only cam eraman to catch Franco Harris's

“Immaculate Reception,” the incredible deflected catch that lifted the Steelers over the Raiders in
the 1972 playoffs. Steve Sabol int.; Kram “Steve Sabol Makes History;” Block, ”The 27th Team.;”
Clare Conley, “He's Having a (Foot) Ball,” Dayton Leisure, Jan. 13, 1980.

287 The real wonder: Rozelle letter to Ed Sabol, Oct. 19,1977, Rozelle papers. 287 But to

call Films: Steve Sabol int.; Weiss int.

287 While the staff: Steve Sabol int.
“It could be argued”: Yagoda, “Not So Instant Replay.”
The early efforts:The Gladiators; Profile of a Season, NFL Creative Services brochures.
In anticipation: Weiss int.
“I think David Boss”: Gardner int. 289 In 1970:Pro! Magazine, Vol. 1, 1970.
To his closest: Weiss int.; Sahadi int.; Arkush int.
Bill Curry: Plimpton and Curry, One More July, pp. 45-46.
But after the pitched: Ralbovsky, Super Bowl, p. 149.

1 6: “GOD, NIXON AND THE
NATIONAL FOOTBALL LEAGUE”
After the Cowboys: Roy Blount, Jr., “The Super Bowl,” advertising supplement to 5/, Jan. 10,

1977.

He returned to Los Angeles: Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes, p. 475.
294 When the Cowboys’: St. John, Tex!, p. 105. 294 On July 31: Ibid., pp. 106-7.
294 Thomas returned: Ibid., p. 98.
294 Thomas was an exceptional: Blaine Newnham, “Wow, Like Let's Really Try to Win,” 5/,

Oct. 12,1970; Bidwill int.; Merchant, And Every Day You Take Another Bite, p. 60.

Many of those: Merchant, And Every Day You Take Another Bite, p. 59; Robert Lipsyte, “Out of

Their League—I,” Sports of the Times, NYT, Dec. 21, 1970.

Weeb Ewbank: Zimmerman, The Last Season of Weeb Ewbank, p. 185.
295 Among the most pointed: Merchant, And Every Day You Take Another Bite, p. 63.
Lombardi indeed: Paul Zimmerman, “The Good, the Great and the Ugly: Some Football

Biographies Just Don't Stack Up,” CNNSI.com, Oct. 19, 2000.

Lombardi had visited: Schramm int.; Teele int.; Benedict int.; St. John, Tex!, p. 161.
The news hit: St. John, Tex!, pp. 71-72.
In Baltimore: Tex Maule, “Nay on the Neighs, Yea on the Baas,” SI, Aug. 14,1972.
297 “I'm benched”: Plimpton, Mad Ducks and Bears, p. 377; Patterson, Football in Baltimore,

pp. 203-4.

298 Allen's arrival: Gildea and Turan, The Future Is Now, pp. 3,4-5. 298 Allen would become:

Ibid., p. 170.

Popularized around: They also included: “2. The greatest feeling in life is to take an ordinary

job and accomplish something with it. 3. If you can accept defeat and open your pay envelope
without feeling guilty, then you're stealing. 4. Everyone, the head coach especially, must give

110 per cent. 5. Leisure time is that five or six hours when you sleep at night. 6. No detail is too
small. No task is too small, or too big. 7. You must accomplish things in life, otherwise you are

like the paper on the wall. 8. A person without problems is dead. 9. We win and lose as a team.
10. My prayer is that each man will be allowed to play to the best of his ability.” Allen, Fifth
Quarter, p. 41; Gildea and Turan, The Future Is Now, p. 14.

“I can remember”: Duane Thomas and Paul Zimmerman, Duane Thomas and the Fall of

America's Team (New York: Warner, 1988), p. 118.

299 Dear George: Allen, Fifth Quarter, p. 125; Gildea and Turan, The Future Is Now, p. 229.

299 President Richard M. Nixon: Gildea and Turan, The Future Is Now, pp. 17,261.
299 Later in the season: Though Nixon also was a well-known baseball fan, he rebuffed the

suggestion that any support he could give might help the woeful Washington Senators. “The
Senators?” asked Nixon. “It wouldn't have helped. In baseball you can't say to Harmon Killebrew,

‘Come on, go out there and hit the ball.’ He's already trying to hit the ball. It's more an individual

effort. In football, it's more of a team effort; morale is everything. In baseball, spirit and morale
are not as important. The Redskins have the right spirit.” Ibid., pp. 259,265.
299 The team stayed: Ibid., pp. 289,294.
In the Azores: Merchant, And Every Day You Take Another Bite, pp. 35-36.
The Redskins qualified: Gildea and Turan, The Future Is Now, p. 316; Koppett, The New York

Times at the Super Bowl, p. 234.

300 It wasn't just: Senator Edmund Muskie cracked, “We need more than a new game plan.

We need a new coach.” That prompted Spiro Agnew's response, “I doubt seriously if Muskie's two

yards and a cloud of dust is sufficient to impress even his fellow Democrats.” Merchant, And

Every Day You Take Another Bite, pp. 35-36; Brooks Clark, 5/, Nov. 28, 1994; Patterson, Grand
Expectations,

p.

753;

United

States

Air

Force

http://www.wpafb.af.mil/museum/history/vietnam/vietnam.htm.

military

history,

300 Nixon's fandom:Time, Oct. 9,1971.
300 That view was: Hunter Thompson, “Fear and Loathing at the Super Bowl,” Rolling Stone,

Feb. 15, 1973.

300 Thompson and Nixon: Hunter Thompson, Fear and Loathing on the Campaign Trail (San

Francisco: Straight Arrow, 1973), p. 61.

301 There was one tangible: Kemp int.; Carothers int. 303 There were two: Lanier int.
303 Miami then eliminated: Jeff Meyers, Great Teams Great Years: Dallas Cowboys (New York:

Macmillan, 1974) p. 95; Dave Anderson, “Coach Nixon Sends in a Play to the Miami Dolphins,”

NYT, Jan. 4, 1972; Dave Anderson, “L.B.J. Exhorts Cowboys, but Has No Play for Them,” JV77;
Jan. 11, 1972.

Media Day: Zimmerman, “Mute but Mighty,” Sports Illustrated Presents Dr. Z's Great Moments in

Super Bowl History.

The game itself: Meyers, Great Teams Great Years: Dallas Cowboys, p. 93.
A jumpy Brookshier: Koppett, The New York Times at the Super Bowl, p. 257; Daly and

O'Donnell, Pro Football Chronicle, pp. 224-25.

While the sight lines: Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes, p. 469.
The same was true: Dawson int.

AstroTurf had come about: Harris, The League: The Rise and Decline of the NFL (New York:

Bantam, 1986), p. 259; Patton, Razzie Dazzle, p. 126.

306 The claims of effectiveness: Gene Ward: “Ward to the Wise, the War Room on Park

Avenue,” New York Daily News, Dec. 8,1968; William Johnson, “Goodbye to Three Yards and a
Cloud of Dust,” 5/, Jan. 27, 1969; Astro-Turf advertisement, “82,000 Fans Didn't Pay to See

This,” Super Bow/IV game program, Jan. 11,1970; Poly-Turf advertisement, “The grass is greener.
At the Super Bowl;” Super Bow/V game program, Jan. 17, 1971.

306 But among players: There were two vastly different views about synthetic surfaces, each

purist in its own self-perception. Among those who played the game, the idea of playing on a
carpet felt false, corporate, insulated, and unrealistic, as odd as playing golf indoors. Alex Karras
of the Lions, after a game in Houston, reported, “It kind of squishes. When there's no crowd in
the Astrodome, and the place is quiet like a tomb, all you can hear is this squishing as the players

run. The Texans are very proud of it; they think of it as a fancy Persian rug.” Or as the Steelers’
Glen Edwards aptly put it after his arms were scraped during a slide on Three Rivers Stadium

AstroTurf, “That stuff be looking good, but it be burning my ass.” Phil Patton, in his book on
football on television, Razzie Dazzle, pointed out that the interiors of domes “like any stage or
studio, are everyplace and no place. That is their purpose: to abolish the contingencies of climate
and geography.”

But the contrary view, held by many in the league office and more than a few coaches

throughout the league, was that the games were too important to be settled in any way other than
by the teams on the field, that the exigencies of sun, rain, or snow were elements of chance that
ought to be eliminated.

After a couple more years, even Maule would relent. Plimpton, Mad DucL and Bears, p. 401;

Gale Sayers, as told to IraBerkow, “I Say Artificial Turf Is Hurting Football,” Sport, Sep. 1971;
John Underwood, “New Slant on the Mod Sod,” SI, Nov. 15, 1971; Patton, Razzie Dazzle, p. 123;
Blount, About Three Bricks Shy, p. 140; Maule, The Pro Season, p. 87.
At Arrowhead: Bobby Bellini.
Tom Condon: John Underwood, “Just an Awful Toll,” SI, Aug. 12, 1985.
“Artificial turf has made”: Edwin Shrake, “The Day of Indignity Is Past,” 5/, Aug. 14,1972.
The decision to play: Weiss int.

308 But as early as 1972: Tex Maule, “Time to Take Stock,” SI, Sep. 18, 1972. 308 In Kansas

City: Stram int.; Costello int.

309 Though the Cowboys:Biount, About Three Brich Shy, p. 169.
Shula had studied: Shula int.; Taylor int.; Dawson int.
Miami would prove: Wells Twombly, “Chuck Knox Makes Nice” Esquire, Oct. 1974; Cohen et

al., eds., The Scrapbook History of Pro Football, p. 303.
1 7: AMERICA'S TEAM
312 The paradox: NFL Publicity Department, Super Bowl Notes, Quotes and Anecdotes: Games
I-XXXVII, 2004. 312 Rozelle routinely expressed: “The Playboy Interview: Pete Rozelle,”

Playboy, Oct. 1973.

Other than the actual: Weiss int.; Hadhazy int.; “The Playboy Interview: Pete Rozelle.”
The Friday before: Kensil int; Diane K. Shah, “He Rules America on Sundays,” National

Observer, May 16, 1977.

“The NFL was always;” Kornheiser int.
“People just go on”: Blount, About Three Bricks Shy, p. 291.
314 By the mid-’70s: Rozelle papers; Murray, “Prologue,” in More Than a Game, Wiebusch, p.

9; Accorsi int. 314 Behind the scenes: Anne Marie Bratton (née Rozelle) int.
One day: Summerall int.

Rozelle's life changed:“The Playboy Interview: Pete Rozelle;” Weiss int.; Anne Marie Bratton

(née Rozelle) int.

Around the office: Weiss int.; Accorsi int.; Browne int.
On July 3,1974: Harris, The League, p. 165.
316 Because pro football: Blount, About Three Bricks Shy, p. 237; Gabriel, Player of the Year, p.

67.

The NFLPA's executive: Plimpton and Curry, One More July, p. 100; Maraniss, When Pride Still

Mattered, p. 354; Kramer, Instant Replay, p. 226.

Though Garvey: Pluto, When All the World Was Browns Town, p. 247.
317 The union held firm: Cohen et al., The Scrapbook History of Pro Football, p. 312.
NFLPA president: Plimpton and Curry, One More July, p. 98; Cohen et al., eds., The Illustrated

Scrapbook of Pro Football, pp. 312-13.

For the owners: Joe Marshall, “Full of Sound and Fury,” 5/, Feb. 11, 1974; Harris, The League,

p. 133; Cohen et al., The Scrapbook History of Pro Football, p. 297.

318 But the new league was quickly: Herb Gluck, While the Gettin's Good: Inside the World

Football League (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1975), pp. 217-18; Mark Speck, “The Fire Burned
Bright Before It Went Out,” The Coffin Corner, Vol. 19, No. 6, 1997; Harris, The League, p. 168.
The league returned:Lost Treasures, vol. 10.

The summer of 1974: Herskowitz, “Goodbye, Johnny U.” in A Game of Passi on, Wiebusch and

Silverman, eds., p. 373.

319 Even at the end: Ibid., p. 379.
319 At the dawn: Zimmerman, The Last Season of Weeb Ewbank, p. 301.
There was another reason: Michael MacCambridge, “Juice,” ESPN SportsCentury, p. 226.
On the sidelines: “The P/aybo/Interview: Pete Rozelle,” p. 67.
“I'm a premier receiver”: Gary D. Warner, “Otis Taylor Needs to Win,” Football Digest,

Kansas City Star, Feb. 1972.

In some league cities: Schramm int.; Bobby Bell int.; Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days, pp. 164-65;

St. John, Tex!, pp. 292-94.

321 By 1974: Blount, About Three Bricks Shy, p. 185.
323 Dallas was the team: Thomas and Zimmerman, Duane Thomas and the Fall of America's

Team, p. 124.

In the 70s: Diane K. Shah, “Sis-Boom-Bah,” Newsweek, Nov. 7,1977.
On the field:Lost Treasures, vol. 9; Network Stars of the 70s, NFL Films, 2000. 324 The team's

success: Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days, p. 26.

Writing in the Boston Globe: Thomas and Zimmerman, Duane Thomas and the Fall of America's

Team, p. 124; St. John, Tex!, p. 43.

The Cowboys’ system: Steve Perkins, Next Year's Champions: The Story of the Dallas Cowboys

(New York: World, 1969), pp. 36-37.

325 Their use of computers: Skip Myslenski, “The Better Way,” in The Gladiators (Englewood

Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1973), p. 201.

That 1977 season: Competition Committee Report, 1978, PFW, Dec. 12, 1977.
TheNFL's favored pollster: Smith, Voices of the Game, p. 442.
18: AIR WAR
328 “Take it from there”: Dave Anderson, “The Complete Control of Paul Brown,” NYT, Jan.

2,1976.

Though he retired: Weiss int.; Schramm int.; Harris, The League, p. 248.
For much of: Prior to moving the hashmarks nearer the center, a team's position in relation to

the sidelines was almost as big a consideration as its position up and down the field. Teams
almost automatically rotated their zone defenses to the open side of the field, since this was

where most of the open territory lay. “Especially teams that ran a lot of sweeps, once they got
over to one side, they were much easier to defend,” said Johnny Robinson, the Chiefs’ All-Pro
safety. “You didn't have to cover outs and you could play inside of the receiver on that [short]

side. Suddenly the hashmarks are narrowed, that side opens up, and now everything changes;”
Robinson int.

For Paul Brown: Brown and Clary, PB, pp. 331-32; Lamb, Quarterbacks, Nickelbacks, p. 23;

Norm Clarke, “Brown Wants'Bump'Rule Phased Out,” St. Paul Dispatch, Feb. 25,1974.
In addition to: St. John, Tex!, p. 337.
If the 1976: Undated Jim Kensil memo to Rozelle, Rozelle papers.
331 On November 5,1976: Rozelle note to Klein and Modell, Nov. 5, 1976.
At the same time: Ibid.

At the league's: Diane K. Shah, “He Rules America on Sundays,” National Observer, May 16,

1977.

332 “The idea of parity”: Weiss int.
332 With all that: NFL confidential documents, 2001.
The ensuing deal: William Wallace, “NFL Is Said to Engineer $576 Million Deal,” NYT, Oct.

26, 1977; Harris, The League, p. 279.

By the end:2004 NFL Competition Committee report.
333 Teams switched: Gary Smith, “The Gamblin’ Man,” Inside Sports, Jan. 1982.
Instead of a two-yard cushion: Leonard Shapiro, “Speed Kills,” Inside Sports, Nov. 1981.
“He has ideas”: Mike Brown int.
334 Like a great student: From Sid Gillman, the conceded father of the modern passing game,

Walsh discovered surpassing complexity and imagination, but he would also see some of the

same gremlins that would bedevil Clark Shaughnessy. “Sid had a system of football that was so

complete, that had so much diversity to it,” Walsh said. “Now, in a sense it was too diverse. It

was too expansive, because you couldn't ever distill all that into specific highly timed and skilled
plays—it was just too much football.” Walsh int.

335 While Brown: Ibid. 335 So when he: Ibid.
In San Francisco: Spadia int.
The 49ers’ starting: Lamb, Quarterbacks, Nickelbacks, pp. 38-39.
“I had no idea”: Walsh int.
“We knew”: Ibid.
“This inherent, instinctive”: Ibid.
“What are your”: Ibid.
Afterward, the Cowboys: Zimmerman, “Off on the Wrong Foot,” SI, Jan. 18,1982.
339 Pro football's incursion: Günther and Carter, Monday Night Mayhem, p. 256.
The 49ers-Bengals: Roone Arledge remarks, Pete Rozelle memorial service, New York City,

Jan. 16, 1997. Leonard Shapiro, “Rozelle Ail-Time League Leader,” Washington Post, Jan. 17,

1997.
“I think he”: Summerall int.
1 9: UNDER SIEGE
While this would: Upshawint.; Rebels of Oakland: The Äs, the Raiders, the ‘70s documentary.

HBO, 2004.

What is understandable: Davis int.; Al Davis interview transcript, Rebels with a Cause

documentary.

For much of: Weiss int.; Accorsi int.; John Crittenden, “Rams Owner Raps Yom Kippur Game”

Miami News, Sep. 30, 1976.

During a private: Harris, The League, pp. 281-82; Teele int.
When Rozelle put the amendment: Weiss int.; Davis int.; Ribowsky Slick, p. 278.
345 Then, on April 2,1979: The memorial service that followed in California was produced

by Rosenbloom's widow, the lounge singer Georgia Rosenbloom (who arrived with a grand
entrance nearly an hour late). Howard Cosell delivered the eulogy, after Rozelle declined to do

so, finding the entire setting unseemly. Renee Rosenbloom, the wife of Rosenbloom's son Steve,

described it as the “only funeral I ever saw that could have played eight weeks in Las Vegas.”
Cosell, I Never Played the Game, p. 26; Raiders Transfer Litigation/Chronology of Pertinent
Events, NFL internal document.

A longtime NFL owner: Not-for-attribution int.; Cosell, I Never Played the Game, pp. 53-54.
On March 1: Raiders Transfer Litigation, internal document; not-for-attribution ints.
Howard Cosell had eviscerated: Günther and Carter, Monday Night Mayhem, p. 256.
The trial itself: Dave Anderson, “NFL Franchises Now Free Agents,” Sports of the Times, NYT,

May 9,1982; Rosenthal, Fifty Faces of Football, p. 96.

No sooner: Don Reese with John Underwood, “I'm Not Worth a Damn,” 5/, June 14,1982.
Though the approach: Walsh int.; Zimmerman, “An Overdose of Problems,” 5/1983 College &

Pro Football Spectacular.

And, always: In the Davis bio Slick, Mark Ribowsky quoted Gene Upshaw saying that the

Raiders were waiting for a signal, based on how Davis's acceptance speech began, but Upshaw
later denied this in a 2003 conversation with the author. “Shit, this goddamn group of mine
wouldn't have understood which way he started.” Ribowsky, Slick; Upshaw int.

One of 1982’s: Frank Deford, “The Colts Were Ours … They Were One with the City”

Scorecard, SJ, Apr.9,1984.

Sundays at 2:00:“There Used to Be a Ballpark,” NFL Films, Part 12.
351 On November 15,1981: E. M. Swift, “Now You See Him, Now You Don't,” SI, Dec. 15,

1986.
It was Accorsi: Accorsi int.
By that time: Patterson, Football in Baltimore, p. 228.
At the league office: Rozelle letter to Irsay Jan. 27,1984, Rozelle papers; memorandum for

the record, Feb. 7, 1984, Rozelle papers; minutes of the Privileged Executive Session of the
Special Meeting of the National Football League, Mar. 2,1984, PFHOF.
On March 28: Gildea, When the Colts Belonged to Baltimore, p. 267.
There was precious little: Form letter sent to those complaining about Baltimore move,

Rozelle papers.

Irsay's greeting: Tom Fitzpatrick, “Hoosiers’ Honeymoon Sours as Colts Jekylls Turn into

Hydes,” Column, Arizona Republic, Apr. 3, 1984.
354 Then it was: Ibid.

354 “I can say this”: Beano Cook, undated letter to Rozelle, Rozelle papers.
20: THE LAST STAND
356 Fielding questions: Will McDonough, “A Just Reward for the Upstarts,” Boston Globe,

July 31,1986.

With the hard-won: Paul Zimmerman, “Choice Is Leftovers,” 5/, Apr. 30,1984.
On September 13: Chet Simmons letter to Pete Rozelle, Sep. 13,1984, Rozelle papers; Pete

Rozelle letter to Chet Simmons, Sep. 27,1984, Rozelle papers.
“Of course”: Peterson int.

It would take nearly two years: Carroll et al., Total Football II, pp. 536-37.
“If you were the client”: Not-for-attributi on ints.
359 If anyone understood: The philosophy that Tex Schramm had distilled into the mantra,

often repeated, “Pounds for defense, not one cent for tribute.” Carothers correspondence with
Rozelle, Rozelle papers.; Carothers int.; Schramm int.
359 “I would not”: Tagliabue int.
“One consideration was”: Ibid.

“We had evidence”: Will McDonough, “How NFL Captured the Case,” Boston Globe, Aug.

3,1986.

As Pinchbeck sat: Pinchbeck int.
361 With that, Rozelle: Pinchbeck int.; St. John, Tex!, pp. 91-92. 361 “Pete, I love you”:

Ibid.

It was left: Craig Neff, “The Award Was Only Token,” SI, Aug. 11,1986.

When Jim Brown: Anonymous, “The Game Needs More Heroes, More Gladiators,” 5/, Dec.

12, 1983.

362 “It was the single”: Steve Bornstein int.; John Walsh int.
Back on the field: Paul Zimmerman, “Passing Attacks Get Forty-Sixed,” The NFL Century, p.

262.

Even entire teams: Modell's relationship with his players was remarkably strong, and he'd

been well ahead of the curve in forming “the Inner Circle,” a group of former players and drug
and chemical dependency experts who regularly met with at-risk players who had a history of
problems with drugs and alcohol. Modell int.; Jim Brown int.; Accorsi int.; New-some int.

364 At the end: Accorsi int.; Douglas Looney, “There's a Love Fest on Lake Erie,” 5/, Aug.

26,1985. 364 The team was: In the 1986 off-season, their star second-year safety Don Rodgers, a

key part of an increasingly nasty and potent defense, died under bizarre circumstances, suffering
a crack overdose at his own bachelor party. Even in this tragedy, the Browns proved resilient.

They signed USFL castoff Felix Wright and continued their intimidating defensive style. Accorsi
int.; Schottenheimer int.

When the NFLPA walked out again: St. John, Tex!, p. 148.
After the Patriots-Dolphins: Schramm int.; Polian int.
These replacement players: Peter King, The Season After: Are Sports Dynasties Dead? (New

York: Warner, 1989), pp. 80-83.

“If you're going to”: Polian int.
“Back in the ‘60s”: Younger int.
“Sometimes, all this talk”: Brown and Delsohn, Out of Bounds, p. 52.
Though the change: AP, “NFL: ‘We Take the Issue Very Seriously’ ” Oct. 1,2002.
“I want to help”: Dungy int.; Young int.
The actor Laurence Fishburne: Fishburne int. (1993).
Through the long: In the frequent absences of Rozelle at the league office, and with Jim

Kensil gone to the Jets, more responsibility fell to Don Weiss, who was promoted to executive

director. “Don really kept the league going in the ‘80s,” said director of pro player personnel Joel
Bussert. “Pete had the Raiders case, and right after that there was the USFL lawsuit, and he was
just consumed with that, and understandably so. Weiss really kept the whole thing going as a
football league. He really filled the role to an extent that few people realized.” Bussert int.
371 Carmen Policy: Policy int.
“I sawmore”: Weiss int.
Paul Tagliabile: Tagliabue int.

21: CHANGING OF THE GUARD
373 Wednesday, March 22, 1989: The committee was considering a decision on Tex

Schramm's ambitious plan to use an electronic device in officials’ whistles that would allow the
replay official in the booth, when reviewing a play, to see a mark on the screen in dicating the
precise instant when the whistle was blown. It was a sign of the changing times that this was

another in a growing set of instances in which Schramm wouldn't get his way. “We thought it
would just further complicate the matter,” said Vikings GM Mike Lynn a day later. AP, “Replay
for Instant Replay,” NYT, Mar. 24, 1989.

373 Pete Rozelle called: John Wiebusch, “Q&A,” GameDay Magazine, Vol. 20, No. 3, Sep.

1989; Michael Wilbon, “Rozelle Announces Retirement from NFL,” Washington Post, Mar.
23,1989.

On his way: Jack Sheppard, “Rozelle Stuns NFL with Tearful Goodbye,” St. Petersburg Times,

Mar. 23, 1989; Schramm int.; Browne int.; Weiss int.; Peter King, “Rozelle Steps Down,” New
York Newsday, Mar. 23, 1989; Dave Goldberg, AP, “Rozelle Resignation.”

So was Rozelle: Videotape of Rozelle press conference, Mar. 22, 1989, NFL Films archives.
Wellington Mara: Sheppard, “Rozelle Stuns NFL with Tearful Goodbye.”
Into that harsh light: MacCambridge, “A Man in His Prime,” ESPN SportsCentury, p. 279. 375

At the combine: Derrick Thomas int.

Heretofore: MacCambridge, “A Man in His Prime,” ESPN SportsCentury, p. 279.
“Frankly, we can't”: Jones int. 376 “Well, what do”: Ibid.
376 “I don't know”: Ibid.
On February 28: Golenbock, Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes, p. 710.
“I will sell my house”: Ibid., p. 745; Will McDonough, The NFL Century: The Complete Story of

the National Football League, 1920-2000 (New York: Smithmark, 1999), p. 280.

377 “You could tell”: Jim Dent, King of the Cowboys: The Life and Times of Jerry Jones (Hol-

brook, MA: Adams, 1995), p. 112.

“We had a lot”: Ed Hinton, “Man with a Mission,” SI Presents: That Super Season: The Dallas

Cowboys Return to Glory, 1993, p. 36.

Football, of course: Sally Jenkins, “The Mouth That Roars,” SI, Oct. 25, 1993.
“Atthetime”: Dent, King of the Cowboys, p. 119.
Though the NFL Dave Anderson, “In the Final Hours, Pete Rozelle Reflects,” Sports of the

Times, NYT, Nov. 5,1989; 2003 NFL Record and Fact Book chronology, pp. 406-7.

379 The lone recommendation: Rooney int.; Aiello int.; Wellington Mara int.; Policy int.;

not-for-attribution int.; Peter King, “The NFL's New Boss,” 5/, Nov. 6, 1989; Rick Telander, “The

Face of Sweeping Change,” 5/, Sep. 10, 1990.
Paul Tagliabue: Tagliabue int.
He came from: His paternal grandfather, Joseph Tagliabue, arrived in the United States from

northern Italy in the late 1890s, and launched his own construction company in New Jersey,

before dying in 1922 in a fall from a scaffold. Charles Tagliabue, Paul's father, took over the

family business at age eighteen, and split from his uncle at an early age to start his own

company, because the older man thought that his nephew's notion of investing money in trucks
was foolish. Paul Tagliabue int.; Charles Tagliabue int.

380 Charles Tagliabue's boys were encouraged: Paul Tagliabue int.; Charles Tagliabue int.
380 Though Paul: Asked in 1990 to name a crazy period in his life, he answered, “Nothing in

particular, except when I fell in love with my wife.” At NYU, Tagliabue befriended future senator
of Tennessee Lamar Alexander, who himself spent several holidays back in Jersey City with the
Tagliabue clan. “If you say ‘ma'am’ to me one more time,” Tagliabue's mother told Alexander on
his first visit, “I'm going to smack you.” Alexander int.; Telander, “The Face of Sweeping
Change.”

381 The baton: Undated notes on career, Rozelle papers; Rozelle letter to Paul Tagliabue, Sep.

11, 1990, Rozelle papers.

381 For Tagliabue: Tagliabue's tenure technically began Sunday, November 5, and he

attended a game in Washington that evening, in which the Cowboys won their only game of the
season, upsetting the Redskins, 13-3. His first workday in the New York office as commissioner
was Monday, November 6. Tagliabue int.; Browne int.

He more than compensated: Weiss int.; Browne int.; Pash int.
Tagliabue's first major decision: And yet the parallels between football and war were so

stark, and so embedded in the language, that it became difficult to avoid them, especially after
General Norman Schwarzkopf, in addressing his troops before the initial attack, noted that “Iraq
has won the toss and elected to receive.” Norman Chad, “Networks Mixed Games, War with

Dignity,” The National, Jan. 21, 1991; Shirley Povich, “They Didn't Call Time in the Big One,”

Washington Post, Jan. 19, 1991; J. Adams, “Norman After the Storm,” London Sunday Times, Sep.
27,1992.

The war was: Press conference transcript, Jan. 25,1991.
Johnson's crowing: By then, the Cowboys had already returned to the top of the charts

among teams in NFL merchandise sales. Though they'd slumped to fifteenth in the league in

1990, selling only 2 percent of all merchandise, they were back to number one, with 16.9 percent
of all sales in 1992, and would rise as high as 29 percent in 1993. Confidential league
documents.

And it was clear: Paul Zimmerman, “Big D, as in Dynasty,” 5/, Feb. 8, 1993.
“You're not going”: St. John, Tex!, p. 78; Upshaw int. 384 That philosophy informed:

Upshaw int.

384 By the end: As early as 1982, there had been proposals on the table that would have

provided the players very limited free agency, and a percentage of the gross much lower than the

55 percent they struck over in 1987. “But it didn't matter to Tex,” said Bill Walsh. “He would

have been opposed to it even if it was 2 percent.” Walsh int.; Paul Tagliabue int.; John Wiebusch,
“Q&A,” GameDay Magazine, Vol. 20, No. 3, Sep. 1989.

384 On the morning: Tom Friend and Christine Brennan, “Colleagues Heap Praise on

Rozelle,” Washington Post, Mar. 23,1989; Paul Tagliabue speech, Oct. 9,1989, Tagliabue papers.

Among the first people: Tagliabue would remember Davis's message slightly differently. “You

can't pressure Gene, though,” Tagliabue recalled Davis telling him. “He's an offensive lineman,

and he's been taught his whole life that if he gets hit in the head to hit back harder, but not to
lose his cool.” Apprised of the quote, Davis replied, “Naw, that's not what I said. But it sounds
good.” Davis int.; Paul Tagliabue int.

Though Tagliabue: Tagliabue found in Upshaw a reasonable counterpart. “I really like this

guy,” he told his friend Nick Langone. “He's one of the more practical, logical people to work
with.” Paul Tagliabue int.; Shell int.; Upshaw int.; Langone int.

And over the next days:United States v. National Football League, 116 F. Supp. 319 (E.D. Pa.

1953).

The idea became: The agreement sent shock waves through the world of sports. De facto

baseball commissioner Bud Selig was on the board of the Green Bay Packers, and had repeatedly
told his friend, Packers president Bob Harlan, that the NFL would “never get a cap.” Harlan int.
386 “We had been”: Policy int.
386 But for a: Peter King, “Put a Sock in It,” Inside the NFL, SI, Sep. 5,1994.
386 There would still be: Schaap, Flashing Before My Eyes, p. 284.
22: PEARL HARBOR
“I've never heard”: Rupe int.
In the past: Peterson int.
389 Schottenheimer's fundamental: Ibid.
What the team: Mac Cambridge, “Without Them, We're Wichita”
For the cities: Donovan and Drury, Fatso, pp. 146-47.
391 The shock from the news: The league office would later claim he had been misquoted,

and years later, Tagliabue himself would say, “I don't recall that I said it in those words.” But the

comment, attributed to him and not immediately corrected, had an air of condescension to it.
Howard Balzer, “Why Jacksonville? T-Shirts, of Course,” PFW, Dec. 12, 1993.

391 A bereft John Steadman: Letter from John Steadman to Pete Rozelle, Dec. 10, 1993,

Rozelle papers.

393 In 1992, in the midst: But the Broadcasting Committee was still headed by the esteemed

Art Modell, who had sat in on many of the negotiations, and whose experience in TV production
had been a boon to the league. Modell was an old-school negotiator, who once stopped Rozelle in
the street after a tense negotiation and said, “Pete, promise me right now, we'll never make a
deal with the networks in which they lose money.” Modell int.; Jones int.; Vito Stellino, “Tough
Challenge for Tagliabue,” Baltimore Sun, carried by the LAT, Mar. 21, 1992.

393 A year later: CBS, which claimed to have lost $200 million on the previous deal, had

counted on its nearly forty-year tradition as the network of the NFL to carry the day, but Fox's

$1.58 billion bid for the four-year package of NFC games was $100 million per year higher than

CBS's reluctant final bid. “Seldom have two companies fought harder for the right to lose
hundreds of millions of dollars,” observed Newsweek when the deal was announced. “In Pro
Football, Plus Ca Change,” News of the Week, Newsweek, Jan. 3, 1994.

The deal ushered: Rick Korch, Steve Silverman, Ron Pollack, and Dan Arkush, “FOX

Television Buys into NFL,” PFW, Dec. 26,1993.

Meanwhile, in Southern California:“Is L.A. Too Wimpy to Build New Stadium?,” LAT, Feb.

22, 1994, reprinted in Jim Murray, Jim Murray: The Last of the Best (Los Angeles: Los Angeles
Times, 1998), p. 145.

The problem, however: The Rams formally submitted to the approval process, but had little

luck in convincing either Tagliabue or the other owners that a move was warranted. In the letter

Tagliabue wrote to the owners assessing the necessity of the proposed move, he recommended
that “the Rams’ proposed relocation be disapproved by the membership. In my judgment, the
relocation, on the terms presented, does not serve League interests, now or in the future.” Paul
Tagliabue, memorandum to principal owners, “Re: Request by the Los Angeles Rams to Transfer
Their Home Playing Site to St. Louis, Missouri,” Mar. 9, 1995, confidential document.

395 In April, the league: The Rams agreed to turn over more of their deal into the league

central fund (the logic being that, had St. Louis been chosen as an expansion team, the franchise
fees would have been divided equally among existing teams). Pash int.; Tagliabue int.; Teele int.

395 Suddenly, Al Davis: Shell was quickly hired by Marty Schottenheimer in Kansas City

where he saw the Raiders-Chiefs rivalry from another perspective. Prior to talking to the team in

advance of the Chiefs’ first 1995 game against the Raiders, Schottenheimer turned to Shell and

said, “Art, I hope you won't take any of what I'm about to say personally,” then proceeded to rip

into the Raiders’ philosophy, discipline, leadership, and character, reminding his club that, “if

you stay in it until the fourth quarter, they'll fold.” Shell int.; Schottenheimer int.; not-forattribution int.

While the Raiders: Al Davis int.; Nelson George int.
And within the league: Steve Wulf, “Bad Bounces for the NFL,” Time, Dec. 11, 1995.
In contrast: Modell remained ever the raconteur, full of wit and one-liners, seemingly always

in the middle of a Borscht Belt stand-up act. “I fell in love with football back in 1934,” he was

fond of saying, “when I went to see the Brooklyn Dodgers play the New York Giants. My first
favorite player on that Dodger team was Earl Lumpkin, ‘cause he played without a helmet.” Then
Modell would wait a beat, before adding, “I think he's an owner now.” Modell int.
Modell had suffered: Peter King, “Down… and Out,” SI, Nov. 13, 1995.
“At some point”: Tagliabue int.
“I felt like”: Hal Lebovitz, for thirty-five years an ally of Mo dell's, typified the reaction of

many in Cleveland. “He kept the Stadium going when the city didn't have the money to operate

it,” Lebovitz said. “By taking over the Stadium, he helped keep the Indians in town. He saved the
Stouffer Hotel, which is downtown next to Terminal Tower. He did so many wonderful,
charitable things. To me, there was nothing in Art Mo dell's manner or personality to indicate he

would move to Baltimore. I knew there was trouble between Art and the city, but Art was the
guy who was always blasting Al Davis and those other owners who moved their teams. I had
never known Art to lie or be a hypocrite. But with this … by moving the team, he killed all the

good works he did over all the years in one fell swoop.” Grozaint.; Pluto, When All the World Was
Browns Town, p. 300.

398 The game at Cleveland: Bill Livingston, “Browns Are Already on Outside Looking In,”
Cleveland Plain Dealer, Nov. 6,1995. 398 In the stands: King, “Down … and Out.” 398

Houston (another team): Ibid. 398 The next morning: Timothy Heider, Tom Diemer, and

Evelyn Thiess, “Deal Announced in Baltimore,” Cleveland Plain Dealer, Nov. 7,1995. 398 “I didn't
want”: Modell int.

The funereal scene: Ron Smith, The Cleveland Browns: The Official Illustrated History

(Lincolnwood, IL: Sporting News, 1999), p. 202.

The irony that Baltimore: William Schaefer, letter to Tagliabue, italics in original, Nov. 16,

1995, Rozelle papers.

Those mid-’90s years: Weiss int.; Rozelle letter to Jack Landry, Jan. 6,1994, Rozelle papers;

Rozelle letter to Super 30 media club members, Jan. 24, 1996, Rozelle papers.

“There are only two”: William Charland, “Pete Rozelle: Absent Hero Behind Green Bay's

Success,” Christian Science Monitor, Dec. 10,1996.

23: “A DIFFERENT WORLD”
402 He was usually: Matthews int.; Unitas int.
And though the effects: John Steadman, “The Golden Arm Is on the Mend, Unitas,” Baltimore

Sun, Oct. 5, 1997.

When asked: Unitas int.
403 Unitas had played: Gildea, When the Colts Belonged to Baltimore, p. 204.
403 “If one truism”: King, The Season After, p. 24.
403 That presented: Parcells int.
If the culture: Blount, About Three Brich Shy, p. 209.
“Look, white kids”: Curry int.
“I was at”: Billick int.
“What they did”: Wolf int.
But in 1999: Eisenberg, Cotton Bowl Days, p. 25; Skip Hollands worth, “The Ringmaster of the

Media Circus: Michael Irvin,” Texas Monthly, Sep. 1996; Brown, Out of Bounds, p. 121.
And the 49ers: Policy int.
For the teams: Paul Zimmerman, “Big D as in Dynasty,” 5/, Feb. 8,1993.

In this new: Polian was recruited to Indianapolis by Colts owner Jim Irsay, determined to put

his own mark on the floundering team after the death of his father, Robert, in 1997. Polian int.;
Jim Irsay int.

Had they gone: Polian int.; Peter King, “The Toughest Job in Sports,” 5/, Aug. 17, 1998.
While the stakes: Schottenheimer int.
The rise of player development: Dungy int.
In July 1999: Paul Tagliabue int.
Though the Rams:Gotta Go to Work, Rams 1999 season highlights.
“I remember talking”: Billick int.
410 Green's backup: Gary Horton, et al., eds., The War Room, 1999 preseason issue.
410 Instead, from his first start: Michael Silver, “Hallowed Be His Game” reprinted in Special

Commemorative Issue of 5/, Super Bowl Champs: The Amazing Season of the 1999 St Louis Rams.
“Most new quarterbacks”: Vermeil int.

Though Warner would: Kurt Warner with Michael Silver, All Things Possible (San Francisco:

Harper San Francisco, 2000), p. 23.

411 “The simple fact is”: Shields int.

411 “idiot kicker”: Tom Friend, “Footloose,” ESPN The Magazine, Oct. 27,2003.
When the Packers’:ESPN Sports Center broadcast, Nov. 24, 2002.
“You don't know”:Lost Treasures, vol. 20, NFL Films, 2003. 412 “You know, people”: Polian

int.

“Baseball fans think”: David Plotz, “Washington Diarist: Off Base,” New Republic, Dec. 20,

1999.

The following year: Patterson, Football in Baltimore, pp. 241-42.
413 In the late ‘90s: In response to the negative publicity, the league's publicity office began

publishing a recurring series of feel-good stories about players’ off-field efforts for charity or
education, under the shrill headline: “Dearth of Positive News? Don't Think So!” Nflmedia.com.
413 It was a problem: Benedict and Yaeger, Pros and Cons, pp. vii-xiv.
Lewis was exactly: Bob Glauber, “Lewis Not Running from the Past,” Fort Lauderdale Sun-Sen

tinel, Aug. 15,2001.

From the day: Billick had convinced his previous boss, Dennis Green in Minnesota, of the

efficacy of integrating playbook, scouting reports, and tendencies in a single database. Green int.;
Walsh int.; Billick int.

In the buildup: William Rhoden, “For a Day, All Paths Lead to Ray Lewis and His Past,”

Sports of the Times, NYT, Jan. 24, 2001.
415 Yet no less: Jim Brown int.

The Ravens trounced: At the following morning's press conference, in which MVP Lewis and

his coach Billick were set to appear, Tagliabue pulled them aside prior to the event and curtly
counseled them to be gracious champions. Billick grimaced and acknowledged the advice, but
didn't necessarily take it to heart. Later, he would say only, “I appreciated the input; I have been
doing this for awhile.” Paul Tagliabue int.; Billick int.; Aiello int.
“I recognize that”: Jim Brown int.
In his classic study: Leonard Koppett, Sports Illusion, Sports Reality: A Reporter's View of Sports,

Journalism, and Society (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1981), pp. 20-21.
24: MAN AT THE TOP

419 But as the deadline:“You're asking a number of taxpayers to subsidize something they'll

never get to use, said state senator John Lewis (R-Orange).”It's corporate welfare.” Barbara
Kingsley, “Not Enough,?” Orange County Register, Aug. 1, 1999.

As media outlets: Richard Sandomir, “How One Network's Urgency Spelled Riches for the

NFL,”. NY?; Jan. 17,1998.

Meanwhile, the NFL“The NFL Machine,” Business Week, Jan. 27,2003.

Amongthe most: Confidential league documents.
“When Paul asks”: Browne int.; Aiello int.; Pash int.
“If you understand”: Bruce Schoenfeld, “In Tough Times, NFL Chief Redefines League

Leader's Role,” Street & Smith's Sports Business Journal, Jan. 7-13,2002.

422 The year that would:“Quarterback/Interview: Pete Rozelle,” Quarterback magazine, Vol.

1, No.1, Oct. 1969.

But having the teams: Gordon Forbes, “New Teams Mean League Must Tackle Realignment,”

USA Today, Dec. 1, 1993.

Just weeks later: A day later, the verdict came in on the Raiders’ latest suit, with the league

winning handily, a jury ruling that the NFL had not sabotaged the Raiders’ efforts for a new
stadium in the Los Angeles area. (Though the verdict would, over a year later, be thrown out,
leading to more in the latest round of Raiders litigation.)
423 The first weekend: Accorsi int.
423 At the league office: Peter King, “On the Spot,” SI, Sep. 24,2001.
423 In the wake: Tagliabue int.; King, “On the Spot.”
The Giants’ player rep: Accorsi int.
“This is not”: King, “On the Spot.” 424 The league made: Ibid.

424 “The NFL acted first”: Thomas Boswell, “A Situation Much Too Serious for Any Games,”

Washington Post, Sep. 14, 2001.

Tagliabue, with his: Tagliabue int.
What had seemed: Peter Keating, “NFL Nation,” ESPN The Magazine, Feb. 4, 2002.
425 The buildup to:“I find football so interesting strategically,” Rice said. “It's the closest

thing to war.” Gregg Easterbrook, TMQ column, “I'm Pickin’ Up Good Vibration,” slate.com, Jan.
29,2002.

425 The game itself: The Patriots might have put an end forever to Super Bowl pregame

introductions when, instead of having each starter run out while introduced, the entire forty-six
men on the roster ran on the field en masse. In the two seasons following, neither team chose to
be introduced individually.

By the end: Schoenfeld, “In Tough Times, NFL Chief Redefines League Leader's Role.”
By the dawn: Rozelle int.; Mara int.; Peterson int.
“The playing field”: Tagliabue int.
“He uses”: Not-for-attribution int. 427 Neil Austrian: Neil Austrian int.
427 The battle became: Goodell int.; Dan Rooney int.

Ultimately: Confidential league documents; not-for-attribution ints.
“This is the only”: Peterson int.
428 Against this:“The fans of the team aren't there,” said the Washington Posts Tony Korn-

heiser of Super Sunday. “It's a corporate business holiday for rich Americans. It's the ultimate for
being a Ford dealer or a Bud dealer. You want the fans, the fans are outside, roaming around
outside trying to score a ticket. It's always been that way.” Kornheiser int.

For cultural impact: Bernice Kanner, The Super Bowl of Advertising: How the Commercials Won

the Game (Princeton: Bloomberg, 2004), pp. 2-3.
Rozelle began: Joe Browne int.

The entire spectacle: Robert Weintraub, “Last Call for Raider Nation,” slate.com, Jan. 27,

2003.

“At some point”: Wolf int.
What hurt: Todd Jones, “Lost Legacy,” Columbus Dispatch, Oct. 8, 1999.
“I can remember”: Dungy int. 431 “I don't see”: Mike Brown int.
431 “He is so”: Not-for-attribution int.
25: THE MAIN THING
“I grew up”: Parcells int.
“There are no”: Parcells int.
433 The Steelers'patriarch: Wiebusch, Lombard/, p. 91.
More than ever: The ten teams that played in the Super Bowl during the seasons 1998-2002

averaged 12.6 wins in their title seasons. The season following the Super Bowl, when none of the
ten returned to the big game (or even won a playoff game), those same teams averaged just 7.8
wins per season.

NFL games: It took six years, 1972 to 1977, to come up with as many double-digit

fourthquarter rallies as the NFL witnessed in 2002 alone. 2003 NFL Competition Committee

report. 434 The margin:“When I walked into my office Sunday and saw my wife and saw my
coaching staff's wives, I'll tell you, whew, it ain't worth it,” Vermeil said in October, after another

big lead was wiped out in a late loss. “You can't do it too long. Because you are not the only one
who suffers. You're not the only one that dies, but you know that this is your responsibility. And
you're conditioned—you've coached yourself how to handle it. But the other parts of your life,
they aren't coached.” Ivan Carter, “Playoff Dreams Slipping Away for Chiefs,” Kansas City Star,
Oct. 23, 2002.

While free agency: Armey int.
“There are two”: Accorsi int.

“Shof, let me”: Spurrier quotations related by Ernie Accorsi.
If Parcelle and Vermeil: Parcells int.; Vermeil int.; Billick int.; Green int.; Dungy int.
In the culture: Cunningham int.; Peterson int.; Stiles int.
“That's just”: Walsh int. 437 “We have thought”: Pash int.
Within two weeks: Peterson int.; Stiles int.; Vermeil int.
“For some reason”: Jarret Bell, “Dungy Welcomes Chance to Be No. 1,” USA Today, Jan. 14,

2004.

438 “One of the great”: Polian int.
438 Sooner or later: Vermeil int; Bill Parcells and Will McDonough, The Final Season: My Last

Year as a Head Coach in the NFL (New York: Morrow, 2000), p. 12; Dungy int.; Billick int.
439 In return: Vermeil int. 439 On August 23: Ibid.
A week later:“Training Camp: Day 39,” kcchiefs.com, Aug. 27,2003.
“The thing that”: Billick int.

“The guy I'm”: Lewis int.; Mike Brown int.; “Sounds of the Season, 2003,” NFL Network, 2004.
“I think”: Paul Tagliabue int.
443 In 2003: John Clayton, “Upsets More Likely in AFC Playoffs,” ESPN.com, Dec. 26,2003.

443 “I've never been”:“Sounds of the Season, 2003.”
445 “perhaps the most”: Peterson int.
“our quarterback picked”: Polian int.
“a 41-0 loss”: Ibid.
“There is a moment”: Curry int.

447 Given all those: Jackson's bizarre halftime sideshow became the single most searched

event in the history of the Internet, exceeding the number of searches for the 9/11 attacks or the

2000 presidential election or any other event since Lycos began monitoring Internet search
requests in 1999. Aaron Schatz, “The Things You're Searching for: Janet Makes History,” Feb. 45, 2004, http://50.lycos.com/.

449 “You gotta remember”: Zygmunt int.
EPILOGUE: AMERICA'S GAME
In the fall: Gifford int.
But after Rozelle's death: Jonathan Franzen, The Twenty-seventh City (New York: Farrar,

Straus & Giroux, 1988), p. 26.

“Baseball in 1960”: James int.

452 It was tempting: Harris Interactive press release, “Football Widens Lead as Nation's

Favorite Sport, Baseball Slips, Says U.S. Poll,” Sep. 24, 2003.
454

“Baseball

is

what”:Any

anygivensunday/warnerbros/com/prod.html.

Given

Sunday

press

notes,

454 At the same: “What's happened here is the football teams feel they have to artificially

stimulate the fans” noted David Hill of football in America. “They roll out these long-dead
English rock ‘n’ rollers like Gary Glitter and whatever, and cheerleaders, and all that is to

artificially stimulate the crowd. Whereas in England, [the fans] make up their own songs. It was
one of the fascinating things after John Madden watched a World Cup, he said, ‘Wouldn't it be

great if American fans didn't need this? If they were so passionate about their teams, they would
create a song using the player's name?’ So the passion that I've seen in other parts of the world

does not exist here for sports.” Hill int.; Nick Hornby, Fever Pitch (New York: Riverhead, 1992), p.
231.

455 “To me, the fans”: Accorsi int.
455 “I'd probably still1: Madden int.
“validation”: Shields int.
“Look at how”: Faulkner int.
“Not at all”: Polian int.
As the perceptive: James Lawton, The All-American War Game (Oxford, U.K.: Blackwell,

1984), p. 2.

“I considered it”: Younger int.
“I reject”: Don DeLillo, End Zone (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1972), p. 164.
458 After Elvis Presley's death: Lester Bangs, “Where Were You When Elvis Died?,” reprinted

in Rock and Roll Is Here to Stay: An Anthology (New York: Norton, 2000), p. 627.

BIBLIOGRAPHIC ESSAY

In addition to the 600 hours of interviews I conducted with players, coaches, owners,

administrators, and longtime observers of the game, I also had the pleasure of reading and
drawing from many of the best pro football books written in the past sixty years. The “small ball”
theory of American sports literature holds that golf and baseball are the true literary pursuits, but
the collected works on pro football provided a much richer well than I had imagined.

As with any sport, there is much that is unreadable—the standard stultifying player

biographies, the largely pedestrian team histories, the outraged deconstruction of the meaning of

football by those who dislike both the game and its fans. There persists in some quarters a feeling

that football people are too uniformly gung ho and achievement-oriented to write interesting
books, and any number of self-justifying coaches’ autobiographies would support that thesis. Yet
the game has yielded numerous underappreciated literary gems, often quirky and complex, many
of which have little more in common than a curious penchant for absurdly long subtitles.

An overview of the main sources I used: General History. The best history of the National

Football League has been running in weekly installments, in the pages of Sports Illustrated, over
the past fifty years. The serious, authoritative Tex Maule set a new standard for understanding of

the pro game, and his successors, including Dan Jenkins, Paul Zimmerman, Peter King, and
Michael Silver have maintained that level, each with his own unique voice. Some of the best of

their work is in Pro Football: Four Decades of Sports Illustrated^ Finest Writing on Professional
Football (Birmingham, AL: Oxmoor House, 1993). Much of their contemporary work, like King's
Monday Morning Quarterback and Zimmerman's Dr. Z's Mailbag can be found only on si.com.

Among single-volume general histories, the most entertaining is The Pro Football Chronicle: The

Complete (Well, Almost) Record of the Best Players, the Greatest Photos, the Hardest Hits, the Biggest
Scandals, and the Funniest Stories in Pro Football (New York: Macmillan, 1990), by Dan Daly and

Bob O'Donnell. It's a rollicking, readable decade-by-decade account of the pro game loosely

modeled on Bill James's The Historical Baseball Abstract, and one of the rare books worthy of
being mentioned in the same breath.

For more conventional histories, the best in recent decades have been those produced by the

league. The NFL Century: The Complete Story of the National Football League, 1920-2000 (New
York: Smithmark, 1999) is a large-format coffee-table book, smartly illustrated, with Will McDo-

nough writing the main text. (An earlier version, titled 75 Years, was published on the occasion

of the league's seventy-fifth anniversary in 1994.) Both are more comprehensive, if less dynamic,
than the first title from the NFL Properties Creative Services division, The First Fifty Years: A
Celebration of the National Football League in Its Fiftieth Season (New York: Simon & Schuster,
1969). That volume, by David Boss and Bob Oates, belongs in any pro football fan's library.

Two earlier general histories are worth noting. Harold (Spike) Claassen's The History of

Professional Football: Its Great Teams, Games, Players and Coaches (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice
Hall, 1963) was the definitive history of the league at the time of its publication, and is

organized around an annual review of each season's events, and a series of informative, readable
team histories. Robert Smith's Pro Football: The History of the Game and the Great Players (Garden

City, NY: Doubleday, 1963) lacks the encyclopedic breadth of Classen's book, but provides a
more coherent overview.

There is a richer vein of work on the game in specific eras. Myron Cope's The Game That Was:

A Beautifully Illustrated and Lovingly Written Account of the Great, Early Days of Pro Football (New

York: World, 1970) is one of the best works about the NFL's pre-World War II era, and includes a
memorable chapter with Steelers patron saint Art Rooney.

The‘40s. Robert Peterson's Pigskin: The Early Years of Pro Football (New York: Oxford University

Press, 1997) contains the best account I've read of football in the war years, with Peterson
showing just how dire the league's position grew in the early ‘40s. A good complement to

Peterson, and the best account of the formation of the All-America Football Conference, is
Thomas Littlewood's Arch: A Promoter, Not a Poet: The Story of Arch Ward (Ames: Iowa State
University Press, 1990).

The‘50s. Mickey Herskowitz's The Golden Age of Pro Football: NFL Football in the 1950s (Dallas:

Taylor, 1990) is a handsomely illustrated account of the decade in which the game grew up,

written in Herskowitz's wry Texas voice. Stuart Leuthner's oral history Iron Men: Bucko, Crazylegs,
and the Boys Recall the Golden Days of Professional Football (New York: Doubleday, 1988) has just
twenty-six subjects, but is able to delve deeply into the histories of each, to provide an

illuminating series of accounts of the game in the ‘40s and ‘50s. Leuthner's book features the
best, most candid interview I've seen with the Browns’ legendary Marion Motley.

There are two superb documentaries on the decade: the 2001 HBO production The Game of

Their Lives: Pro Football's Wonder Years, and the two-part NFL Films presentation The Fabulous
Fifties.

The‘60s. Bob Carroll's When the Grass Was Real: Unitas, Brown, Lombardi, Sayers, Butkus,

Namath, and All the Rest: The Best Ten Years of Pro Football (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1993) is

a careful, loving account of the game's crucial decade from one of the sport's leading historians.

Carroll has brought a treasure of historical essays online in his Pro Football Researchers
Association Web site (footballresearch.com), an extension of the PFRA journal The Coffin Corner.

This was also the decade that pro football hit the best-seller lists, thanks in part to the budding

myth of Vince Lombardi and the Packers. First came Lombardi's own memoir of a week in the
1962 season, Run to Daylight! (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1963), with collaborator W C.

Heinz. Jerry Kramer's sharply rendered account of the 1967 season, Instant Replay (New York:

World, 1968) also was a hit, and a convincing portrait of Lombardi. It wasn't just the Pack, of
course. George Plimpton's Paper Lion (New York: Harper &Row, 1966) and Frederick Exle/s

somber A Fan's Notes (New York: Random House, 1968) gave the sport a measure of literary
cachet.

Many of the best books on the game in the ‘60s focus on the self-contained history of the

American Football League. Ed Gruver's The American Football League: A Year-by-Year History,
1960-1969 (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1997) is the most thorough general history, and is smartly

complemented by Jeff Miller's recent oral history Going Long: The Wild 10-Year Saga of the
Renegade American Football League in the Words of Those Who Lived It (Chicago: Contemporary,

2003), which attempts to do for the AFL what Terry Pluto's hilarious Loose Balls did for the ABA,

and almost pulls it off. Also worthy is Bob Curran's The $400,000 Quarterback, or: The League That
Came in from the Cold (New York: Signet, 1969), which documents the AFL's early years. The one
essential volume is the gorgeous coffee-table book The Other League: The Fabulous Story of the

American Football League (Chicago: Follett, 1970), by Mike Rathet and Jack Horrigan. The best
documentary on the history of the AFL comes in HBO's 1995 documentary Rebels with a Cause:
The Story of the AFL, another installment in the network's Sports of the 20th Century documentary
series.

For a unique perspective on the early years of the AFL, there's A Proud American: The

Autobiography of JoeFoss (New York: Pocket Books, 1992), though Foss's consistent positivism
occasionally glosses over some of the tenser moments in the league. William J. Ryczek's Crash of

the Titans: The Early Years of the New York Jets and the AFL (Kingston, NY: Total Sports, 2000) is a
morbidly fascinating account of the comedy of errors that was Harry Wismer's franchise. It's hard
to imagine that the same franchise, with some of the same players, was just a few years later
responsible for the sport's biggest upset. The best account of Super Bowl III is Dave Anderson's

Countdown to Super Bowl (New York: Random House, 1969), in which the respected New York
Times writer provides an hour-by-hour portrait of the Jets heading up to the big game.

The 1969 season, the league's fiftieth and the last before the AFL and NFL fully merged,

provided a clear line of demarcation, and two books smartly capture the sensibilities of that

season. Player of the Year: Roman Gabriel's Football Journal (New York: World, 1970) and Tex

Maule's diary of the 1969 season, The Pro Season (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1970) provide
useful reminders of how small a world the NFL once was.

The ‘70s. A golden era for pro football publishing, partly because the game had arrived on

Madison Avenue, and because David Boss's Creative Services Division at NFL Properties was
publishing several volumes a year.

Dan Jenkins's best-seller Semi-Tough (New York: Atheneum, 1972) and its follow-up, Life Its

Ownself are still the funniest fictional glimpses of the pro game. Pete Gent's North Dallas Forty

(New York: Morrow, 1973) remains among the darkest. Roy Blount, Jr., never had pro football as
a beat during his time at Sports Illustrated, but his account of his year with the Pittsburgh
Steelers, About Three Bricks Shy of a Load: A Highly Irregular Lowdown on the Year the Pittsburgh

Steelers Were Super but Missed the Bowl (Boston: Little, Brown, 1974) is still the best season-in-thelife meditation on the game from the inside, all the better for the contrast between Chuck Noll's

straight-arrow mind-set and Blount's skewed, ruminative perspective. There's also an updated
paperback version, About Three Bricks Shy—And the Load Filled Up: The Story of the Greatest

Football Team Ever (New York: Ballantine, 1989), which includes the original book, plus several
essays Blount wrote about the Steelers in later years.

While Paul Zimmerman's A Thinking Man's Guide to Pro Football (New York: Dutton, 1970)

justly earned “Dr. Z” a national following, I'm still partial to his account of the New York Jets’

1973 campaign, The Last Season of WeebEwbank (NewYork: Farrar, Straus &Giroux, 1974), a
remarkably intimate picture of a once great team in decline and turmoil.

Two other George Plimpton titles must be mentioned. His collaboration will Bill Curry, One

More July: A Football Dialogue with Bill Curry (New York: Harper &Row, 1977) is an engrossing,
ruminative read. And Mad Ducks and Bears (New York: Random House, 1973), written with Alex
Karras and John Gordy, is a meditation on the inglorious life of linemen.

The ‘80s. The decade's best football title was Hey, Wait a Minute, I Wrote a Book (New York:

Villard, 1984), John Madden's readable account of his football career, written with Dave
Anderson.

David Harris's exhaustively researched and reported The League: The Rise and Decline of the NFL

(New York: Bantam, 1986) aptly parses the boardroom rivalries that dominated NFL politics in
the decade.

Not to be missed, for its keen take on the writer's and fan's differing perspectives, is Wait Till

Next Year: The Story of a Season When What Should've Happened Didn't and What Could've Gone

Wrong Did (New York: Bantam, 1988), the highly entertaining collaboration between Mike
Lupica and Oscar-winning screenwriter William Goldman. Jim Brown's Out of Bounds (New York:
Kensington, 1989) is the rare item—a player's account of pro football that's both sensational and

thoughtful.
The ‘90s and Beyond. The decade began with the NFL's own The Super Bowl: Celebrating a

Quarter-Century of America's Greatest Game (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1990), a wonderful

retrospective of the first twenty-four games of the series, with essays, photographs, gatefold

illustrations, lineups, and play-by-play recaps for each game. For another league perspective,
there was Don Weiss's The Making of the Super Bowl: The Inside Story of the World's Greatest

Sporting Event (Chicago: Contemporary, 2003), co-written with Chuck Day, in which Weiss
describes the league's early efforts to mount not just a sporting event but an entertainment

spectacle. There are plenty of interesting behind-the-scenes vignettes, and a glimpse into the

mind-set of Pete Rozelle, but left unanswered is the larger question of how the league balanced
the integrity of the game with the constant push toward greater elements of entertainment and
showmanship that surrounded it.

Whatever the merits or flaws of their research methodology, Jeff Benedict and Don Yaeger's

Pros and Cons: The Criminals Who Play in the NFL (New York: Warner, 1998) sheds new light on a

troubling issue. Tim Green's player's-eye view The Dark Side of the Game: My Life in the NFL (New
York: Warner, 1996) seeks to demystify much of the glamorous myth surrounding the sport.

Though its perception was skewed a bit by the sales hook—an interview with an active NFL
player discussing his homosexuality—Michael Freeman's Bloody Sundays: Inside the Dazzling,

Rough-and-Tumble World of the NFL (New York: Morrow, 2003) is a sharp overview of the
different pressures that come to bear on the modern game.

The best account of the era of “franchise free agency” comes in Jon Morgan's Glory for Sale:

Fans, Dollars and the New NFL (Baltimore: Bancroft, 1997). For a deeper look at one city's
frustrations, there's Ed Fowler's Loser Takes All: Bud Adams, Bad Football and Big Business (Atlanta:

Longstreet, 1997), a book that at times is more of a screed against Adams than a balanced
assessment of the events that led the Oilers to move to Tennessee.

Among the key franchises I focused on in the book, four of them—the Rams, Browns, Chiefs,

and Cowboys—merited their own separate volumes in the NFL's Great Teams, Great Years series,
all published by Macmillan in the mid-’70s. Jack Clary's Cleveland Browns (1973), Steve Bisheff's

Los Angeles Rams (1973), Dick Connor's Kansas City Chiefs (1974), and Jeff Meyers's Dallas
Cowboys (1974) are all rewarding, and excellent introductory histories to the respective clubs,
though each title is fairly screaming for an index.

Rams. No franchise has been more influential, and none has a more fascinating history than

that of the much-traveled Rams. Joseph Hession's Rams: Five Decades of Football (San Francisco:

Foghorn, 1987) is the best treatment. For the early history of the club, Bob Oates's long out-ofprint The Los Angeles Rams (Los Angeles: Miller Gee, 1955) is essential. In addition to Roman
Gabriel's Player of the Year, the George Allen-era Rams are also presented in Bill Libb/s Life in the

Pit: The Deacon Jones Story (Garden City, NY: Doubleday 1970). A more complete portrait of

Jones emerged later in John Klawitter's Headslap: The Life and Times of Deacon Jones (Amherst,

NY: Prometheus, 1996). The best document of the remarkable 1999 season in St. Louis is found

in Kurt Warner's autobiography All Things Possible: My Story of Faith, Football and the Miracle
Season (San Francisco: Harper, 2000), with Michael Silver.

Browns.PB: The Paul Brown Story (New York: Atheneum, 1979), written by Brown and Jack

Clary, was criticized for its lack of generosity of spirit at the time, but it's still an informative

work, as interesting for what's left unsaid as for what's said. The best assessment of the coach's

galvanizing impact on his players can be seen in Alan Natali's handsome oral history Browns
Town: 20 Famous Browns Talk Amongst Themselves (Wilmington, OH: Orange Frazer, 2001).
Further insight into Brown can be found in the life of his onetime best friend, Blanton Collier.

Footballs Gentle Giant: The Blanton Collier Story (Lexington, KY: Life Force, 1985) is well written
by Collier's daughter, Kay Collier Slone (now McCullough), and includes much of Collier's
techniques and correspondence. Brown was still feared, though less revered, by the time he took

over the Cincinnati Bengals. A portrait of those years can be found in Bob Trump/s Trump: Ten
Years with the Bengals (Virginia Beach: Donning, 1979), with Bill Mefford.

Of the franchise as a whole, Terry Pluto's When All the World Was Browns Town: Cleveland s

Browns and the Championship Season of ‘64 (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997) is a richly

detailed account of that club, all the more poignant for coming just two years after Art Modell

moved the team to Baltimore. William V. Levy's Return to Glory: The Story of the Cleveland Browns
(Cleveland: World, 1965) is more prosaic, but includes much valuable detail about the Browns’

first two decades. Among the historical works that greeted the Browns on their return, the best is
The Sporting News’ Cleveland Browns: The Official Illustrated History (St. Louis: Sporting News,

1999), featuring much of Tony Tonisic's marvelous photography, and The Best of the Cleveland
Browns Memories: Players, Coaches and Games (Hinckley, OH: Moonlight, 1999).

Colts. In many ways, the Baltimore Colts were the Brooklyn Dodgers of football writing, a

cherished franchise that inspired more than its fair share of literary contemplation, heightened
by a wrenching move that many would equate with a loss of the entire sport's collective

innocence. The late John Steadman's works—including The Greatest Football Game Ever Played:
When the Baltimore Colts and New York Giants Faced Sudden Death (2nd ed., Stevensville, MD:
Press Box, 1998), From Colts to Ravens: A Behind-the-Scenes Look at Baltimore Professional Football
(Centreville, MD: Tidewater, 1997), and Football's Miracle Men: The Baltimore Colts’ Story

(Cleveland: Pennington, 1959)—provide a solid, authoritative perspective on the key moments of
the franchise's history.

The best-written account of the Colts’ relationship with Baltimore is William Gildea's When the

Colts Belonged to Baltimore: A Father and a Son, a Team and a Time (New York: Ticknor & Fields,

1994), a richly evocative work about the ways in which the team and the town really did come
together. Vince Bagli and Norman L. Macht's Sundays at 2:00 with the Baltimore Colts (Centreville,
MD: Tidewater, 1995) provides a different perspective on the same ground, featuring interviews
with thirty-one of the key figures of the Colts’ years in Baltimore, from John Unitas to announcer

Chuck Thompson. Then there's Art Donovan's raucous, delightful Fatso: Football When Men Were
Really Men (New York: Morrow, 1987), written with gifted collaborator Bob Drury. The book is

as responsible as any work for sparking a renewed interest in the game's characters of earlier

eras. Fans of memorabilia will want to track down Ted Patterson's Football in Baltimore: History

and Memorabilia (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000), with photographs of many of
the Colts souvenirs, programs, trading cards, and marginalia over the years.

Cowboys: The place to start for serious fans of the Cowboys is Peter Golenbock's leviathan oral

history Cowboys Have Always Been My Heroes: The Definitive Oral History of America's Team (New

York: Warner, 1997). There's also plenty of fascinating detail in Bob St. John's authorized
biography of Tex Schramm, Tex!: The Man Who Built the Dallas Cowboys (Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall, 1988), though the book itself seems to have the disjointed narrative structure of a
Charley Kaufman screenplay.

Steve Perkins's Next Year's Champions: The Story of the Dallas Cowboys (New York: World, 1969)

is a well-rendered portrait of the Cowboys before they had the assurance gained from Super Bowl
trophies. John Eisenberg's fans’ memoir Cotton Bowl Days: Growing Up with Dallas and the Cowboys
in the 1960s (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1997) conveys the pride and disappointment of those
early Cowboys teams, as well as the more intimate, immediate environment at the Cotton Bowl.

The complex relationship between Tom Landry and Roger Staubach is well documented in

their respective autobiographies, Tom Landry: An Autobiography (Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan,
1990) and Staubach: First Down, Lifetime to Go (Waco, TX: Word, 1974). The best reflection of

both the corporate mystique and self-importance of the franchise can be found in the team's own
silver anniversary celebration, Dallas Cowboys: The First Twenty-Five Years (Dallas: Taylor, 1984),

a lavish oversized document of the franchise written by Carlton Stowers with a foreword by

James Michener. For an alternate view of this same organizational structure, there's of course
Pete Gent's North Dallas Forty (New York: Morrow, 1973) and Duane Thomas and the Fall of
America's Team (New York: Warner, 1988), written by Thomas and Paul Zimmerman.

The best document of Jerry Jones's impact on the team can be found in Jim Dent's King of the

Cowboys: The Life and Times of Jerry Jones (Holbrook, MA: Adams, 1995).

Chiefs. Joe McGuff's Winning It All: The Chiefs of the AFL (Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1970),

written right after the Chiefs’ Super Bowl win, is the best overview, by the longtime columnist of
the Kansas City Star. It makes for a good companion piece with Len Dawson: Pressure Quarterback

(New York: Cowles, 1970), written by Dawson and Lou Sahadi (whose ambitious magazine Pro

Quarterback is one of the lost treasures of the early ‘70s). The team also produced a remarkable

series of club yearbooks in the late ‘60s and early ‘70s, a golden age of football publishing. More
recently, Mark Stallard's The Kansas City Chiefs Encyclopedia and Alan Hoskins's Warpaths: The

Illustrated History of the Kansas City Chiefs (Dallas: Taylor, 1999), though it has the drawback of

not including any work from two photographers most associated with the team, Rod Hanna and
Hank Young. More than 100 of Hanna's photographs appear in McGuff's book, while Young's own

Gameface (Kansas City: Young, 2001) is a wonderful collection of sideline portraits over the past

thirty years. Hank Stram's They're Playing My Game (New York: Morrow, 1986) commits the usual

sins of coaches’ autobiographies—all the anecdotes are a little too clean and a little too vague.
More pointed is the Otis Taylor autobiography, Otis Taylor: The Need to Win (Champaign, IL:
Sports Publishing, 2003), which in addition to its crisp recollections of Kansas City in the ‘60s

and ‘70s includes a frank account of the difficulty that black players have historically had in

finding careers in football after their playing days are over. No one has written about the Chiefs
in the past ten years with more insight than my friend Joe Pos-nanski of The Kansas City Star.

Some of his best Chiefs columns can be found in The Good Stuff (Kansas City: Star Publishing,
2001).

Raiders. For one of the NFL's most storied franchises, remarkably little has been written about

the Raiders. Mark Ribowsky's portrait of Al Davis, Slick: The Silver and Black Life of Al Davis (New
York: Macmillan, 1991) remains the definitive work on football's most enigmatic figure. The best

book on the franchise's history is Raiders: Collector's Edition (San Francisco: Foghorn, 1991), by
Joseph Hession and Steve Cassady.

Television. William Oscar Johnson covered TV for Sports Illustrated and his seminal overview of
the relationship between sports and TV came in Super Spectator and the Electric Lilliputians

(Boston: Little, Brown, 1971), a book that holds up much better than its title. Marc Günther and

Bill Carter's Monday Night Mayhem: The Inside Story of ABC's Monday Night Football (New York:
Beech Tree, 1988) is a well-researched examination of the phenomenon, with plenty of

finegrained detail on the battles of Howard, Frank, and Dandy Don. The other two essential
works on football and television are Phil Patton's Razzie Dazzle (Garden City, NY: Dial, 1984) and

Ron Powers's Supertube: The Rise of Television Sports (New York: Coward-McCann, 1984). For

personal memoirs, Cosell's and Gifford's reflections are less surprising or provocative than those
of Roone Ar ledge in Roone: A Memoir (New York: HarperCollins, 2003).

Integration. Considering the rich scholarship on the Negro Leagues in baseball, and the

dozens of books on the early stages of integration in that game, there's a shockingly small

amount written about the subject in football. Alan Howard Levy's Tackling Jim Crow: Racial

Segregation of Professional Football (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 2003) is a welcome recent edition.

Prior to that, Thomas Smith's “Outside the Pale: The Exclusion of Blacks from the National
Football League, 1934-1946” and his “Civil Rights on the Gridiron: The Kennedy Administration
and the Desegregation of the Washington Redskins,” both originally published in the Journal of

Sport History, were the most comprehensive accounts of the long battle to integrate the game.

Arthur Ashe's A Hard Road to Glory—Football: The African-American Athlete in Football (2nd ed.,

New York: Amistad, 1993) is a good single-volume reference source, excerpting all the football
writing and records from Ashe's larger classic.

It's regrettable that more interviewing wasn't done with the four men—Kenny Washington,

Woody Strode, Marion Motley, and Bill Willis—who reintegrated the pro game in 1946. Strode's

Goal Dust: An Autobiography (Lanham, MD: Madison, 1990) is the only life written among the

four. Michael Hurd's Black College Football, 1882-1992: One Hundred Years of History, Education,
and Pride (2nd ed., Virginia Beach: Donning, 1998) includes rich details of the pros’ early
dealings with historically black colleges and universities.

The Draft. There have really been only two books that attempted to document the draft.

Hardest-to-find, but worth the trouble, is Cliff Christi and Don Langenkamp's Sleepers, Busts and
Franchise-Makers: The Behind-the-Scenes Story of the Pro Football Draft (Seattle: Preview, 1983).

Interesting, though lacking the broad perspective, is Richard Whittingham's The Meat Market: The
Inside Story of the NFL Draft (New York: Macmillan, 1992).

Strategy. Paul Zimmerman's The New Thinking Fan's Guide to Pro Football (New York: Simon &

Schuster, 1984) is still the best place to start, though after twenty years it could use another

updating (the conscientious Zimmerman, who nearly rewrote the book in his first update, doesn't
sound enthusiastic about the prospect). Peter King's underrated Inside the Helmet: A Player's Eye
View of the NFL (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1993) is an absorbing read, especially for its

detailed explanation of what a quarterback (in this case Boomer Esiason) has to do to prepare for
a game each week.

Tom Bennett's The Pro Style (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1976) is the best one-stop Xs

and Os overview, smartly integrating text and illustrations. Less visually appealing, but every bit
as well written and illuminating, is Kevin Lamb's Quarterbacks, Nickelbacks and Other Loose
Change (Chicago: Contemporary, 1984).

Coaching. David Maraniss's magisterial biography When Pride Still Mattered: A Life of Vince

Lombardi (New York: Simon & Schuster, 1999) is justly celebrated for its rich, vivid portrait of

Lombardi, and the distressed state of the franchise he took over in 1959. The best of the other

portraits of Lombardi are Jerry Kramer's Instant Replay (see “The ‘60s”) and the oral history
Lombardi (Chicago: Triumph, 1997), both of which feature the photography of Vernon Biever.

Jack Clary's The Gamemakers (Chicago: Follett, 1976) begins with a profile of Paul Brown, and

though the other subjects range in personality from Bum Phillips to Tom Landry to John

Madden, the overall tone of the book makes a convincing case for the tremendous influence that
Brown exerted on the way the game was coached.

But football coaches, the winning ones at least, are not often known for introspection and self-

reflection, and thus most of the books they write tend to be archly diplomatic and selfcongratulatory. Two exceptions on the pro level are Bill Parcells and Will McDonough's The Final
Season: My Last Year as a Head Coach in the NFL (New York: Morrow, 2000) and Bill Walsh and

Glenn Dickey's Building a Champion: On Football and the Making of the 49ers (New York: St.
Martin's, 1990).

For books on coaching techniques and strategy, the most influential coaching text in the last

decade has been Bill Walsh's imposing Finding the Winning Edge, which is prominently displayed

in many college coaching offices (and tucked away in more than a few pro ones). That book was
a collaboration among Walsh, Brian Billick, and James A. Peterson; Billick and Peterson later

combined for Competitive Leadership: Twelve Principles for Success (Chicago: Triumph, 2001),
which offers a frank account of the pressures of the game in the twenty-first century.

It's worth noting that three of the best books about coaching have been written by coach's

daughters: Fifth Quarter: The Scrimmage of a Football Coach's Daughter (New York: Random House,
2000), by George Allen's daughter, Jennifer Allen; Fields of Honor: The Golden Age of College
Football and the Men Who Created It (New York: Harcourt, 2001), by John Pont's daughter, Sally
Pont (who also paints a sharp portrait of Sid Gillman during his college coaching days); and

Football's Gentle Giant: The Blanton Collier Story, by Blanton Collier's daughter, Kay Collier Slone,
now McCullough (Lexington, KY: Life Force, 1985).

Photography. The many works of Robert Riger stand out as the early standard for football

photography (that's one of Riger's classic shots on the cover of this book). The two standout
volumes are The Pros: A Documentary of Professional Football (New York: Simon & Schuster,

1960), which was written by Tex Maule, and The Sports Photography of Robert Riger (New York:

Random House, 1995). Walter Iooss, Jr.’s, spectacular Football (New York: Abrams, 1986)
includes a generation of the great shooter's portraits and action shots, as well as text by Dan
Jenkins. Neil Leifer has yet to publish a book exclusively devoted to football, but his oversized

Sports! (San Francisco: Collins, 1992) includes some of his most memorable football shots. The
most impressive of the David Boss-edited books for Creative Services is the lavish The Pro Football

Experience (New York: Abrams, 1973), highlighted by the gritty, intimate locker room scenes shot
by Herb Weit-man.

Anthologies. The best of the group is John Thorn's The Armchair Quarterback (New York:

Scribner, 1982), which includes contributions from many of the classics of the sport, as well as
such hard-to-find items as Murray Kempton's profile of Dick Butkus and the Bears (from Esquire

in 1973), Wayne Lockwood's “Anatomy of a Game Plan” (during one of Sid Gillman's finest

hours), and Gary Cartwright's sharply drawn portrait of Tom Landry. The Fireside Book of Football
(New York: Simon & Schuster, 1964) includes a wider range of talents (from F. Scott Fitzgerald

to Irwin Shaw), but draws most of its coverage from college football. The NFL has produced two

literary anthologies. The first, More Than a Game (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1974) is a
retrospective of the first five years of the league's “stadium magazine” Pro!, and features a
prologue by Jim Murray A Game of Passion: The NFL Literary Companion (Atlanta: Turner, 1994)
delves less deeply but covers a wider range of material.

Annuals. Before sports annuals grew boring and formulaic, there were a few that had some

golden eras—like Stanley Woodward's college football previews in the ‘50s, or the Street & Smith's

College, Pro and Prep Basketball annuals of the late ‘70s. One such run was enjoyed by Pe-tersen's
Pro Football in the late ‘60s and early ‘70s. As edited by former Rams executive Chuck Benedict,

it was a thoughtful, themed annual assessment of the game, with a strong cast of writers and
photographers. The best of the recent volumes are Sports Illustrated^ discontinued stand-alone
annuals of the mid-’90s and the comprehensive previews published today by The Sporting News.

Reference.Total Football II: The Official Encyclopedia of the National Football League (New York:

HarperCollins, 1999), by Bob Carroll, Michael Gershman, David Neft, and John Thorn, is the
most trusted reference work in the game. Beau Riffenburgh's The Official NFL Encyclopedia (4th

ed., New York: New American Library, 1986) is to a great extent a hardbound version of the

league's annually published National Football League Record & Fact Book, though it includes an
essential section of chronologies for each NFL club. The later editions, though, lacked the writing
breadth or conscientious design of the NFL's earlier Official Encyclopedic History of Pro Football

(2nd ed., New York: Macmillan, 1977). The occasionally updated The Sports Encyclopedia: Pro
Football (Grosset &Dunlap, 1999), by David Neft and Richard M. Cohen, is focused more on

teams and seasons than individuals, an approach particularly well suited to football. While
earlier editions date back to 1960, the latest edition includes only 1974-1998.
AUTHOR INTERVIEWS
Ernie Accorsi, Bud Adams, Greg Aiello, Senator Lamar Alexander, Bruce Allen, Etty Allen,

Jennifer Allen, Hub Arkush, Charley Armey, Roger Atkin, Neil Austrian, John Beake, Bert Bell,
Jr., Bobby Bell, Chuck Benedict, Raymond Berry, Charles “Stormy” Bidwill, Jr., Brian Billick, Kim

Billick, Steve Bornstein, Carol Boss, Pat Bowlen, Terry Bradway, Gil Brandt, Anne Marie Bratton
(née Rozelle), Jim Brown, Mike Brown, Joe Browne, Joel Bussert, Ace Cacciotti, Hamilton

Carothers, Roberta Carrell, Bob Carroll, Cris Carter, Daily Childs, Jack Clary, Cris Collinsworth,

Vince Costello, Bill Cowher, Robert W Creamer, Andy Crichton, Günther Cunningham, Bill Curry,
Art Daley, Al Davis, Willie Davis, Len Dawson, Dan Dierdorf, Dave Dixon, Mickey Du-kich, Tony
Dungy, Gerald Early, Gregg Easterbrook, Herman Edwards, Manny Eisner, Jack Faulkner, Mai

Florence, Barry Frank, AI Franken, Dave Gardner, Fred Gehrke, Mike Giddings, Frank Gifford,

Esther Gillman, Sid Gillman, Bill Gleason, Roger Goodell, Otto Graham, Dennis Green, Howard
Green, Forrest Gregg, Lou Groza, Jon Gruden, Peter Hadhazy, Bob Harlan, James Harris, Mike
Haynes, Harold Henderson, Mickey Herskowitz, David Hill, Sam Huff, Lamar Hunt, Jim Irsay,

Bill James, Jerry Jones, Lou Joseph, George Karras, Frank Kasper, Irv Kaze, Buzz Kemble, Jack
Kemp, Ethel Kennedy, Cathy Kensil, Jim Kensil, Mike Kensil, Richard Kirkendall, Herb Klein, Don

Klosterman, Chuck Knox, Tony Kornheiser, Jack Landry, Jr., Nick Langone, Willie Lanier, Dante

Lavelli, John Lehman, Marv Levy, Dennis Lewin, Marvin Lewis, Al LoCasale, Jim Loftis, Jim
Lynch, John Mackey, John Madden, Jerry Magee, Archie Manning, Wellington Mara, Dan

Marino, Jim Matthews, Dorothy Maule, Bill McGrane, Joe McGuff, Stan Mcllvaine, Rich McKay,

Kay Collier McLaughlin, Al Michaels, James Michener, Bobby Mitchell, Art Modell, Bob Moore,

Burk Murchison, Robert Murchison, Pete Newell, Ozzie Newsome, Dr. James A. Nicholas, Collie
Nicholson, Michael Novak, Bob Oates, Bill Parcells, Jeffrey Pash, Max Patterson, Carl Peterson,
Mary Phillips, Don Pierson, Val Pinchbeck, George Plimpton, Bill Polian, Carmen Policy, Joe

Pollack, Brad Pye, Frank Ramos, Jack Ray, Dan Reeves, Jr., Susan Reeves, Lee Remmel, Greg
Robinson, Johnny Robinson, Cooper Rollow, Dan Rooney, Bert Rose, Jr., Charles Rossotti, Dick
Rozelle, Doug Rozelle, Helen Rozelle, Leland Rozelle, Pete Rozelle, Peter Ruocco, Buddy Rupe,
Ed Sabol, Steve Sabol, Pierre Salinger, Warren Sapp, Jim Schaaf, Dick Schaap, Chris Schenkel,
Marty Schottenheimer, Paul Schramka, Tex Schramm, John Semcken, Art Shell, Will Shields, Don

Shula, Michael Silver, Rick Smith, Beverly Snider, Duke Snider, Daniel Snyder, George Solomon,

Lou Spadia, Tom Spock, Jack Steadman, John Steadman, Lynn Stiles, Scotty Stirling, Hank Stram,
Pat Summerall, Chan Tagliabue, Charles Tagliabue, Paul Tagliabue, Jack Teele, Derrick Thomas,

Bob Tisch, Dan Towler, Johnny Unitas, Gene Upshaw, Dick Vermeil, Bill Walsh, John Walsh, Al

Ward, James Warsaw, Don Weiss, Herb Weitman, Lloyd Wells, T. D. Werblin, John Wiebusch,
Ralph Wilson, Lamonte Winston, Ron Wolf, George Young, Paul “Tank” Younger, Paul
Zimmerman, Jay Zygmunt.

Pete Rozelle, Jim Kensil, James Michener, and Dorothy Maule were interviewed by the author

in 1995 for the book The Franchise: A History of Sports Illustrated Magazine.

The Sporting News Archives, The Sporting News Archives, Courtesy St.
Louis Rams
Cleveland Rams players (top) bundle in straw for warmth amid the
brutal conditions at the 1945 National Football League championship

game. Within weeks after the first postwar title game, Bert Bell (above,
early in his tenure) was named the NFL's new commissioner, and Rams
owner Daniel F. Reeves moved the champions to Los Angeles. In the
spring of 1946, Reeves (right) arrives in Los Angeles on the Twentieth
Century Limited.

Courtesy Cleveland Browns
Above: Paul Brown (center), flanked by his staff during one of his early
training camps with the Cleveland Browns. Joining Brown are, from left,
Howard Brinker, Blanton Collier, Weeb Ewbank, and Fritz Heisler.
Pro football integrated again in 1946, with the Rams’ signing of Kenny
Washington (below left, during training camp at Compton Junior College)
and Woody Strode. The AAFC was also integrated, with the Browns’
signing of the bruising fullback Marion Motley (below right) and Bill
Willis, both future Hall of Famers.

Courtesy St. Louis Rams, Courtesy Cleveland Browns

Courtesy St. Louis Rams, Courtesy St. Louis Rams
Eddie Kotal (above), the first full-time traveling scout in the NFL, was
on the road 200 days a year for the Rams and discovered such gems as

Grambling graduate Tank Younger (left), the first player from a
historically black college to play in the NFL.

Courtesy Cleveland Browns
After dominating the AAFC for four seasons, the Browns joined the
NFL in 1950 and won the league title, with Lou Groza's field goal sealing
a 30-28 championship-game win over the Rams.

© Neil Leifer
Pro football comes of age: On the afternoon of December 28, 1958, in
Yankee Stadium, Alan Ameche scores to lift the Colts to a sudden-death
title-game win over the Giants …

Baltimore News-American/Knight Ridder … and later that evening, the
team returned to a joyous riot in Baltimore, where 30,000 fans greeted
the Colts (in bus, after deplaning) at Friendship Airport.

AP/The Sporting News Archives
Bert Bell, at his home in Narberth, working on the intricacies of the
upcoming season's schedule. Bell's death in October 1959 left the league
in a state of flux that would last for months.
For their new commissioner, the owners elected thirty-three-year-old
Rams general manager Pete Rozelle (shown here accepting
congratulations from the Bears’ George Halas, the Eagles’ Frank
McNamee, the Redskins’ George Preston Marshall, and the Eagles’ Joe
“Jiggs” Donoghue).

AP/The Sporting News Archives

San Diego Union-Tribune/The Sporting News
American Football League commissioner Joe Foss sits in the center,
flanked by the AFL's eight owners—from left, Wayne Valley, Billy
Sullivan, Harry Wismer, Bud Adams, Cai Kunz, Ralph Wilson, Lamar
Hunt, and Barron Hilton—collectively known as “the Foolish Club.”

Courtesy Anne Marie Bratton
Evidence of Rozelle's mastery of TV included the NFL's first joint
television agreement, signed with CBS's Bill MacPhail prior to the 1962
season.

Courtesy Sports Illustrated, Courtesy Cathy Kensil

Rozelle's closest aide was Jim Kensil (right), with whom he composed
the press release announcing that the NFL would play its games the
Sunday following John F. Kennedy's assassination. Despite criticism over
the decision, Rozelle was named just weeks later as Sports Illustrated‘s
Sportsman of the Year for 1963.

Courtesy NFL Films
The NFL was years ahead of competing leagues, as indicated by two
brilliant hires in the ‘60s. Ed Sabol (above left) brought his Blair Motion
Pictures company in-house, where it was renamed NFL Films. The
graphic artist David Boss (right) became the guiding creative force of
NFL Properties, which marketed the game in unprecedented ways.

Courtesy Anne Marie Bratton
Even as Rozelle was smoothly guiding the NFL's polished ascendance,
his marriage was falling apart, largely due to the alcoholism of his wife,
Jane. Behind the scenes, Rozelle spent more time with his daughter,
Anne (above, at a 1966 game), whom he quietly raised on his own.

Courtesy Anne Marie Bratton
The seven-year war with the American Football League came to an
uneasy truce on June 8,1966, when Rozelle announced that the NFL and
AFL would come together. Flanking him at the press conference (left)
were Tex Schramm and Lamar Hunt, the lead negotiators for the NFL
and AFL, respectively.

Paul Tepley, © Neil Leifer
In the ‘60s, the game changed on the field as well. The irrepressible
Jim Brown, running during Cleveland's 27-0 win over Baltimore in the
1964 NFL title game, led the Browns to a title two seasons after Paul
Brown had been replaced by Blanton Collier.
Tension was high prior to the first AFL-NFL world championship
game, played January 15, 1967. After the Packers’ 35-10 rout of the
Chiefs, Rozelle presented Vince Lombardi with the trophy (right) that
four years later would be renamed in his memory.

Vernon Biever

Malcolm Emmons, The Sporting News Archive
Two contrasts in quarterbacking styles and lifestyles: Johnny Unitas
(left) embodied the brush-cut, no-nonsense self-reliance of the ‘50s,
while Broadway Joe Namaths long hair, white shoes, and insouciant
demeanor typified an entirely different era and mind-set.

Walter Iooss, Jr.

Rod Hanna, © Neil Leifer
Namath, holding forth by the hotel pool during the week leading up to
Super Bowl III, helped engineer the biggest upset in the sport's history
just days after guaranteeing it.
A year later, the AFL struck again in Super Bowl IV, as Kansas City
dominated Minnesota, 23-7. The Chiefs’ Otis Taylor and Len Dawson
(below left) combined for a remarkable playoff run, and Chiefs coach

Hank Stram (below right) was immortalized in NFL Films’ highlight show
of the game.

ABC
In 1970, pro football hit prime time and proved its muscle when
Monday Night Football became a surprise hit. By 1971, the team of
Howard Cosell, Don Meredith, and Frank Gifford had become celebrities
in their own right, as much of a focus as the game on the field.

Rod Hanna
On Christmas Day 1971, the Kansas City Chiefs’ Willie Lanier and Jim
Lynch walk off the Municipal Stadium field after the longest game ever,
a 27-24 double-overtime playoff loss to Miami.

Courtesy Jennifer Allen
Pomp and circumstance: Coach George Allen shows the nation's First

Fan, President Richard Nixon, around the Redskins compound during
Nixon's visit to pump up the morale of his beloved team in 1971.

Walter Iooss, Jr.
The Colts’ graceless disposal of Johnny Unitas provided a sad final
chapter to his career in Baltimore and foreshadowed even worse times in
the contentious tenure of new owner Robert Irsay

Courtesy Dallas Cowboys, Courtesy Dallas Cowboys, Courtesy Dallas
Cowboys
Though the Steelers won more titles, the Cowboys were the most
influential, visible team of the ‘70s. Tex Schramm (above) lifts the team's
second Super Bowl trophy after the 1977 season. Along the way, Roger
Staubach (handing off to Duane Thomas, below left) ushered in a new era
for quarterbacks, and Schramm made icons of the team's cheerleaders

(below right), shown in their debut season, 1972.

The Sporting News Archives
The Raiders cultivated an outlaw persona in the ‘70s, a reflection of
their Machiavellian owner, Al Davis (above left), and the intimidating
presence of their best players, such as Hall of Fame guard Gene Upshaw
(above right).

The Sporting News Archives
On May 7,1982, Davis and his attorney, Joseph Alioto (right), greet
the press after the Raiders and the Los Angeles Coliseum won their case
against the NFL, prompting an era of franchise free agency that would

last for nearly fifteen years.
In the aftermath of the decision, the way was clear for the antics of
Robert Irsay (below left), the Colts’ owner, who evacuated the club under
cover of darkness on the night of March 29, 1984, heading to
Indianapolis and leaving little behind save a couple of equipment trunks
(below right) and a stunned community wondering how it could recover
its civic treasure.

Coutesy Indianapolis Colts, Courtesy Janis E. Rettaliata

The Sporting News Archives, Courtesy Cincinnati Bengals
After Bill Walsh (above left) was passed over for the Bengals job by

Paul Brown, he wound up in San Francisco, where he changed the face
of the pro game, winning three Super Bowls in ten seasons, including
two at the expense of the Bengals and a chastened Paul Brown (above
right, with his sons, Pete and Mike).

Courtesy Anne Marie Bratton, Bob Rosato
The one high point of a brutal decade for the league was the NFL's
victory in court over the USFL, celebrated by Rozelle and attorney Frank
Rothman (left) in July 1986. By the end of the decade, after twenty-nine
years at the helm, Rozelle was ready to turn over the reins to his
successor and longtime trusted legal adviser, Paul Tagliabue (right).
A lone Browns player watches in the surreal setting of Cleveland
Stadium just a day after the Browns’ plan to move to Baltimore was
reported. Owner Art Modell became a pariah. Five years later, Modell
(right) lifted the Lombardi Trophy as the owner of the Baltimore Ravens.

Courtesy Cleveland Browns, Phil Hoffman/Baltimore Ravens

Courtesy NFL, Courtesy Dallas Cowboys, Courtesy NFL Films

As the millennium dawned, a more assured Paul Tagliabue (above),
having sagely handled the aftermath of the Browns’ move, faced a range
of challenges in managing the league's rapid growth and internal
contradictions. Among his concerns: the continued growth and artistic
creativity enjoyed by Steve Sabol (below right) and NFL Films, and the
bottom-line aesthetic of entrepreneurial maverick Jerry Jones (below
left).

Phil Hoffman/Baltimore Ravens
Ray Lewis of the Ravens was as much a gladiator as predecessors such
as Dick Butkus, but he had a distinctly different style when taking the
field for introductions.

Courtesy Indianapolis Colts, Hank Young/Kansas City Chiefs
The best of the league's administrators, such as the Colts’ Bill Polian
(top) and the Chiefs’ Carl Peterson (above), combined football intuition
with a CEO's smarts.

Courtesy National Football League Players Association

The NFL's place in the national culture was further confirmed late in
2001. Gathered together in Kansas City for the first weekend's games
following the 9/11 attacks were, from left, Wellington Mara, Gene
Upshaw, Paul Tagli-abue, and Lamar Hunt.

Courtesy Dallas Cowboys, Hank Young/Kansas City Chiefs, Phil
Hoffman/Baltimore Ravens, Courtesy Indianapolis Colts

Many felt that coaching was more important in football than in any
other sport, and that coaches were more important in the modern salarycap era than at any other time in the NFL. Old-school practitioners
included the Cowboys’ tough Bill Parcells (above left) and the Chiefs’
tough-loving Dick Vermeil (above right), while two new-school paragons
were the Ravens’ combustible, technocratic Brian Billick (below left) and
the Colts’ serene, focused Tony Dungy (below right).

Copyright © 2004, 2005 by Michael MacCambridge
Anchor Books and colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc.
MacCambridge, Michael. America's game: how pro football captured a nation / Michael
MacCambridge.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Football—United States—History—20th Century. 2. National Football League.
I. Title.
GV954. M32 2004
96.332'64'0973—dc27
2004052003
eISBN: 978-0-307-48143-6
www.anchorbooks.com
v3.0_r1

