Image via GQRecent trends at the NFL have created serious unease among players regarding media access to locker rooms. After each match and practice, they seem to resent that reporters enter their sacred space immediately. Former Baltimore Ravens wide receiver Torrey Smith has alarming things to say about this situation, calling some male reporters "straight meat watchers." Such commentary is disturbing in light of NBA superstar Paul George, who has reflected on the unease he too has felt throughout his 14-year playing career.The Locker Room ConundrumThe NFL allows locker rooms to be opened shortly after a game, as does the NBA; however, the NBA allows only ten minutes of media post-game access. This procedure can provide a media opportunity to catch the first reactions of players immediately after games, but players prefer that these rooms remain sanctuaries. Paul George drove this point home as he referenced risks of strategies leaking and that ten minutes will not provide for adequate preparation time for interviews.Also Read - How NFL Players InvestNFL Locker Room Antics Have Gone TOO FAR | The Ricky Cobb ShowPrivacy IssueAs per Essentially Sports, George said, "The majority of the locker room they are naked. we just got out of the shower." He remembered this one particular incident in Washington with a reporter whose behavior embarrassed players. Now, this reveals an important point: it's not wrong for reporters to appear in the locker rooms, but the timing of their entry is very problematic.Players' Reactions and SolutionsBengals Union Representative Ted Karras stated that reporters aren't being denied access, but players are requesting privacy at sensitive moments. Players aren't looking to get out of coverage entirely; they want cameras not to record certain situations where players might find themselves in compromising positions. It really shows a need by players to have a place that is their own.Changes ComingIt is now revealed that NFL teams can bar access to the locker room for whatever reason they think they need to. And besides, players could request interviews beyond the locker room. The Pro Football Writers of America confirmed that this has already been included in the league's media access policy. As debates continue, it is important that leagues reconsider when access media should get so that the players are left with ample time to go through their transition from the game, then to interviews. An individual's right to privacy must be respected.Also Read - Record Breaking Viewership of NFL