SOURCE_ID: americas_game_chapter_01
SOURCE_TYPE: book
AUTHOR: Michael MacCambridge
SECTION: Chapter 1


1 Going West

Bundled in a heavy winter coat and sporting a beaverskin hat, Daniel
Farrell Reeves dug his hands into his pockets and marched from the
gate bordering the stands out onto the field in the cavernous Cleveland
Stadium. In a matter of hours, his Cleveland Rams would take the field
to play the Washington Redskins for the championship of the National
Football League. But as he surveyed the field in the numbing chill of this
overcast morning two days before Christmas, Reeves could see nothing
on the gridiron but thousands of bales of straw, and a small army of men
laboring to move them. This was pro football in 1945.
Compact and slender, no more than 5-foot-8 and 140 pounds, Reeves
was a man of reserved nature but wry wit. In four seasons, he had grown
accustomed to the perennial financial losses—“Irish dividends,” as he
called them— common to owning a pro football team. But the 1945
season had been uniquely rewarding and frustrating. Reeves had
returned home just two months earlier, after a three-year tour of duty
with the Army Air Corps, to what would become a season-long victory
celebration. America's triumph in World War II had been officially
consecrated during August two-a-days, and the long lines that greeted
the end of gas rationing dissipated by the season-opening win over the
Chicago Cardinals. Just one season after the 1944 squad lost six of its
last seven games, the Rams rebounded to become the surprise of the
NFL, and win their first Western Conference title. In early December,
rookie quarterback Bob Waterfield, soon to be named the league's Most
Valuable Player, was profiled in Life magazine. And though the article

spent less time on Waterfield than his wife—Hollywood bombshell Jane
Russell, star of Howard Hughes's “sex western” The Outlaw, which
censors still hadn't allowed to be screened in the U.S.—the mere thought
that a player for the Cleveland Rams would merit space in Life seemed to
Reeves a miracle in itself.
After the Washington Redskins beat the New York Giants in the
regular season finale, Reeves's dream match-up was set. For the title
game, the Redskins would make their first trip to Cleveland in eight
seasons, bringing along their famed 110-piece marching band to perform
a special Christmas-themed halftime show. Interest was high for the
match-up between the rookie Water-field and perennial All-Pro Slingin’
Sammy Baugh. And so Reeves had bravely decided to move the
championship game from the Rams’ regular stadium, the deteriorating
League Park, with its cramped capacity of 30,000, to Cleveland Stadium,
which seated 80,000.
Six days before the game, the National Weather Service had forecast a
major winter storm hitting the Cleveland area in midweek, so the Rams
had spent the early part of the week searching for enough bales of straw
to cover the tarpaulin, to prevent the field from freezing. It was general
manager Charles “Chile” Walsh who finally located 9,000 bales of straw
from around Elyria, and had it delivered to the stadium at a cost of
$7,200. In the days leading up to the game, eighteen inches of snow fell
on Cleveland, leaving the stadium resembling an arctic snowscape, with
drifts piled several feet high in the aisles.
On Sunday morning, the Rams lined up 275 workers, many of them
off-duty city employees, to remove the bales. While the Rams were
responsible for the field, the city of Cleveland was responsible for the
stadium and the parking lots, which were left unshoveled. Despite the
weather and conditions, the Associated Press projected the game would
draw 50,000, and the New York Times wrote that “a crowd of better than
40,000 is almost certain with a capacity audience of 77,569 possible in
case the forecasters are wrong.”
But when the lights were turned on at Cleveland Stadium at 6:30 the
morning of the game, the temperature was eight degrees below zero.
Marching in mucklucks from the Clevelander Hotel a little before eight,
Reeves bale-fully noted the unpassable streets. There was no parking in

the two blocks closest to the stadium, since that area was overrun with
snow. And taxi service wasn't running to the stadium, another skirmish
in the war between the Rams and Arthur McBride, owner of the
Zone/Yellow Cab Co. and the new Cleveland entry in the All-America
Football Conference, which would begin competition in Cleveland the
following fall.

By 10:30 that morning most of the 9,000 bales had been cleared off
the field. But the trucks that were to transport them away had trouble
gaining purchase on the still clogged city streets, leaving the workers no
choice but to place the straw against the walls surrounding the playing
field. Behind the benches, just in back of the end zones, and stacked
more than ten bales high at the walls, the sea of straw was parted so the
game could be played.
Cleveland Stadium had rarely looked so empty as on this day, when
only 32,178 turned out. When former Rams business manager Manny
Eisner and his wife walked into the stadium about an hour before
kickoff, there were already people filing out, succumbing to the cold. In
the stadium ticket office, Lou Isaacson was more prepared than most.
Dressed in three pairs of socks, knee-high brogan work shoes, two pairs
of pants, two sweaters, and two coats, he sat in the unheated box office
for four and a half hours, and sold two tickets.
In financial terms, Reeves had already resigned himself to the
realization that his share of the gate wouldn't even pay for the cost of
buying, transporting, and removing the bales of straw. But as the kickoff
neared, none of that mattered. Up in the press box, Reeves was nervous
and amiable, greeting writers and VIPs, accepting congratulations for
signing Waterfield to a three-year contract the day before. “The stars are
making so much money now, I call them ‘Mister’ and they just call me
‘Reeves,’ ” he said. When the game began, the joking ended, and Dan
Reeves suffered in silence, as he'd done every game day since 1941,
when he'd bought the team. He paced nervously, far removed from his
wife, Mary, the rest of his family, and his closest friends. It was not a
time to be jovial or even social. It was time for football.
Down on the field, the game sounded different, victim to the noiseless
vacuum of severe cold. There was little kibitzing between the teams, and
almost none of the concussive, amplified smack that so often

accompanied the heavy hitting of professional football. The quality of
play was still sharp, but on a day when the temperature was zero
degrees at kickoff, the players felt the pain more than heard it, each
tackle accompanied by heavy breathing and dull, muffled thuds. The
crowd sounded different as well, its applause muted by layers of gloves,
the cheers rising curt and thin in the icy air.

Even in the ’40s, people argued about whether the pressure of football
built character or revealed it. But Reeves had long ago learned how
capricious the game could be, how random its deciding factors. On this
frigid Sunday, he watched Sammy Baugh's pass from the Redskins’ end
zone hit the goalpost and fall back into the end zone, for what was then
an automatic safety. After Waterfield threw the first of two long
touchdown passes for the Rams, his extra point attempt was partially
blocked, with the ball careening toward the crossbar, hitting it, and
dribbling weakly over. Baugh's freak safety and Water-field's wounded
conversion had been the difference in the 15–14 edge the Rams nursed
into the fourth quarter.
By that time, the windows of the Cleveland Stadium press box had
fogged over, and most of the writers covering the game had abandoned
their typewriters and gone outside into the biting cold, cursing as they
bundled up to face the brutal wind, but drawn to the finish of the frantic
battle below. Reeves himself was outside when he saw the play that
decided the game. With the Redskins nearing midfield in the closing
minutes, running back Steve Bagarus made an end run to the right, then
reversed field and broke free, running in a sweeping arc to the far
sideline, with two Rams in hot pursuit. The first slowed him down and
the second, Waterfield (who in addition to being the star quarterback
was also the team's best defensive back), made a desperate lunge and
extended his left arm before hitting the ground. The contact was scant—
Waterfield's hand barely nicked the toe of Bagarus's trailing foot—but it
was just enough to knock the runner off his feet and save a touchdown.
The Rams’ defense stiffened from there and the Redskins missed a field
goal attempt.
Moments later, the game was over and the Cleveland Rams were
world champions. The hardiest fans stormed the field to tear down the
goalposts in celebration, while the rest of the crowd headed for shelter

and celebration into Cleveland's bars, restaurants, and dance halls. In the
locker room, where the players massed for the traditional celebratory
championship candid photograph, head coach Adam Walsh hugged his
brother, Chile Walsh, and announced, “I knew you were champs back
there at Bowling Green! I knew it! I knew it!”

NFL commissioner Elmer Layden greeted Adam Walsh, his old college
roommate at Notre Dame, with a hug and a handshake. Then Layden
presented Reeves with the league's Ed Thorp Memorial Trophy, given
annually to the NFL champion. “I've been used to losing for so long,”
said Reeves, with tears in his eyes, “that I wasn't counting on anything
until it was all over.”
As Reeves returned with friends and family to his suite at the
Clevelander Hotel, his jubilation was tempered by the private realization
that his time in Cleveland was near its end. Reeves had lost more money
in earlier years, but in the season in which his team had marched to the
world championship, it still lost $64,000. And the prospects for box
office improvement were dim, since the rival All-America Football
Conference would begin play the following season, with a franchise in
Cleveland that seemed to be the strongest in the league.
Reeves had decided, win or lose, that when the NFL held its annual
meeting in January, he would insist on fulfilling his goal, stated for years
in private sessions with the owners, to move his franchise to Los
Angeles. This time, he was determined: Dan Reeves was heading west, or
else Dan Reeves was leaving football.
By the end of World War II, the unique personality and character of
the National Football League had begun to develop. The NFL owners
comprised a particularly hidebound and tightly knit fraternity, loath to
accept outsiders, reluctant to change the often circuitous, inefficient
manner in which proceedings were conducted. Many could remember
the league's earliest years, when it was perceived to be—and for the
most part was—a haphazard assemblage of pickup games and hired
hands making weekend pay.
The Bears’ legendary coach and owner George Halas had been there
from the start, present at the creation of the league, one of sixteen men
in Ralph Hay's Jordan and Hupmobile showroom in Canton, Ohio, in

August 1920. That meeting, called by the league's first president, Jim
Thorpe, laid the foundation for what would be called the American
Professional Football Association, and two years later renamed the
National Football League, though it had no franchises west of Chicago or
south of Washington, D.C.

Its next president, elected in 1921, was the tireless Columbus
promoter Joe F. Carr, who presided over the league's dark ages, in which
thirty-five franchises folded in the league's first ten seasons. At that 1921
meeting, Halas moved the Decatur Staleys to Chicago, where a year later
he renamed them the Bears, and the Green Bay Packers and Earl “Curly”
Lambeau entered the league. In 1925, they were joined by New York
bookmaker Tim Mara, who bought the New York Giants for $2,500,
reasoning that any franchise in New York City ought to be worth that
much.
In 1932 and 1933, the rest of the inner circle came on board. First
there was George Preston Marshall, the bombastic Southern laundry
man, who bought the Boston Redskins in 1932, moving them to
Washington, D.C., five years later. In 1933, “Blue-Shirt Charlie” Bidwill,
Chicago businessman and diehard Bears fan, bought the crosstown rival
Chicago Cardinals, though those closest to him knew the Bears were still
his favorite club.
Then there was Philadelphia's Bert Bell and Pittsburgh's Art Rooney,
who'd met at a horse track in the late ’20s, and whose franchises joined
the league in 1933, the same year that the Pennsylvania state legislature
relaxed its blue laws, allowing sporting events on Sundays. De
Benneville “Bert” Bell, the son of a Pennsylvania attorney general, was a
blueblood aristocrat with a common touch, who spent much of the ’20s
roaring his way through his inheritance. The raconteur Art Rooney, son
of a corner tavern owner in Pittsburgh, was a delightfully egalitarian
personality in his own right. Rooney's team was called the Pirates
throughout the ’30s, before changing its name to the Steelers in 1940.
For most of the ’30s and ’40s, these seven men—Halas, Lambeau,
Mara, Marshall, Bidwill, Bell, and Rooney—were the National Football
League. The ’30s brought hard-earned growth, with liberalized passing
rules, the introduction of a two-division system with an annual
championship game (Marshall's idea), and the first college draft (the

brainstorm of Bell), all introduced under Carr's watch. Through the
decade, the game retained its slangy sense of barnstorming informality.
Pittsburgh head coach Johnny Blood once missed a game because he
simply forgot it was on the schedule. Most players fit practices during
the week around their regular jobs, others came into town on the
weekends and played for less than $100 a game.
The tight band of owners fought like brothers, but persevered in the
face of several rival start-ups, the indifference of much of the American
sporting public, the condemnation of many in college football, and the
failures of several of their partners. Those who remained were cautious,
inherently suspicious of change, and not eager to test their horizons.
In 1936, the Cleveland Rams, who had struggled through a season
with the failing rival American Football League, called NFL president Joe
Carr to apply for an expansion franchise in the NFL. Carr came to
Cleveland, met owner Homer Marshman, and invited him to come to the
next meeting to apply for membership.
“So in December 1936,”recalled Marshman, “I went to the NFL
meeting in Chicago and made my presentation. They told me to sit down
and wait. Next, a man from Houston made his presentation. They
thanked him and told him to leave. I thought that was very impolite
since I was allowed to remain. Next, a man from Los Angeles made a
pitch for Los Angeles. They excused him, too. I couldn't understand it,
because their presentations were every bit as good as mine. As soon as
the two others had left the room, George Preston Marshall jumped up
and said, ‘I move we give it to Cleveland.’ Everybody agreed. It was set
up. They had decided on us in advance. They wanted to keep the teams
in the east and midwest.”

After Carr's death in 1939, the league limped along with former Dayton
owner Carl Storck as acting president. The obese, unprepossessing
Storck, known as “Scummy” during his playing days, had a habit of
opening each league meeting by sitting at the head of the table with a
gavel in front of him and to either side a box of chocolates, from which
he would regularly graze during the discussions. In 1939 and again in
1940, owners tried to interest others in the job. George Halas offered it

twice to Chicago Tribune sports editor Arch Ward, the creator of
baseball's All-Star Game and football's College All-Star Game, the
Tribune’s annual season-opening exhibition between the defending NFL
champions and a team of just-graduated All-Americans. In December of
1939, George Preston Marshall of the Redskins and Dick Richards of
Detroit approached FBI director J. Edgar Hoover about the position.

Storck's resignation in 1941, ostensibly due to failing health, allowed
the owners to rescue themselves from their rudderless state and bring in
a new leader, changing the name of the office from president to
commissioner, and investing it with broad powers, similar to those
enjoyed in baseball by Judge Kenesaw Mountain Landis. At Ward's
suggestion, the league summoned Elmer Layden, still a sports legend
from his days as one of Notre Dame's Four Horsemen. Throughout World
War II, Layden held forth at his office at 310 South Michigan Avenue in
downtown Chicago, aided by publicity director George Strickler.
Layden was well regarded in amateur football circles, and his hiring
was meant to bring about a change in the pro game's reputation, making
it more legitimate in the eyes of the public. But his effect proved largely
cosmetic, and even those slight alterations didn't come easily. It took
Layden four years to push through a rule requiring that all players wear
stockings during games. His other cherished innovation was ordering
officials to wear color-coded shirts (referees in black-and-white, umpires
in red-and-white, head linesman in orange-and-white, and the field
judge in green-and-white), a scheme that veteran official Dan Tehan
ridiculed as a “circus on parade.” Little else changed under Layden.
There was still incessant bickering and politicking, and issues were often
determined by a test of stamina as much as any guiding principle. Those
who left the marathon sessions for some sleep might find the issue had
been decided, not in their favor, by the time they returned the next
morning.
And most teams kept losing money. Four seasons after joining the
league, Marshman sold the Cleveland Rams to twenty-eight-year-old
New York stockbroker Dan Reeves. Reeves was one of the keen, restless
obsessives absorbed by the sport and science of football, a sportsman
who found in the game a beguiling combination of action, violence,
camaraderie, and strategy not duplicated in any other segment of

American life save the military when at war.
Born rich, Reeves was neither flamboyant with money nor particularly
obsessed with increasing his wealth. Though he had played football at
Newman Prep in New Jersey as a boy, he didn't like to hit or be hit. He
was not aggressive by nature. But like many men before him, and
millions more to follow, Daniel Reeves loved the game of football for
reasons he could neither articulate nor fully understand. With the wealth
to do whatever he wanted, Dan Reeves wanted to buy a football team.
Asked by a writer in 1941 to explain why he'd purchased the Rams,
Reeves replied,“Doesn't every boy dream of owning a football team?”
The son of a grocery store magnate, Reeves was in a better position
than most to realize his dreams. Upon buying the Rams, Reeves frankly
explained to his fellow owners that he hoped to move the club to Los
Angeles at the earliest opportunity. That, Reeves emphasized, was a
place where the sport could grow and prosper. Before the season was
over, his hopes and plans, like that of most other Americans, would have
to be put on hold.
The final Sunday of the 1941 season saw the Redskins hosting the
Philadelphia Eagles before a crowd of 27,102 (including the young naval
officer John F. Kennedy) at Griffith Stadium, when a messenger found
Federal Bureau of Investigation assistant director Edward A. Tamm in his
seat, and escorted him to the stadium switchboard. There Tamm was
patched into a call with FBI chief J. Edgar Hoover and a special agent in
charge of the bureau's Honolulu office. The agent in Hawaii held his
phone up to the window of his office so that Hoover and Tamm could
hear the bombs and explosions at the U.S. Army base in Pearl Harbor.
On that Sunday, December 7, 1941, at the three stadiums where NFL
games were being played, it was the football writers who learned the
news before almost anyone else. The clattering Associated Press wire,
which delivered updates from the league's other games on its fat roll of
pulp paper, interrupted its staccato reports with the phrase “CUT
FOOTBALL RUNNING” and then delivered the bulletin about the
Japanese attacking Pearl Harbor.
Within weeks of the attack, President Franklin Delano Roosevelt
addressed the dominant question on the minds of sports fans across the

country.
“I honestly feel that it would be best for the country to keep baseball
going,” he wrote in a January 15, 1942, letter to Judge Landis. “There
will be fewer people unemployed and everyone will work longer hours
and harder than ever before. And that means that they ought to have a
chance for recreation and for taking their minds off their work even
more than before. Baseball provides a recreation which does not last
over two hours or two hours and a half, and which can be got for very
little cost. And, incidentally, I hope that night games can be extended
because it gives an opportunity for the day shift to see a game
occasionally.”
There was no mention, either in FDR's letter to Landis, or in any of his
other pronouncements at the time, of what the future might hold for
professional football, or any other sport. Like such rickety and parochial
pursuits as pro basketball and hockey, the sport was left to its own
devices, less dismissed than simply ignored. Though it had already
developed a following in big cities, pro football lagged behind even
college football in terms of national prestige. The most respected
publication in the sport was the weekly St. Louis newspaper The Sporting
News, which was known as “the Bible of Baseball” but ignored football
until 1942, when it began devoting a single page of coverage to other
sports in season.
And although it was football that had been disrupted by the war—the
NFL title game between the Bears and Giants drew just 13,341 people
two weeks later—much of the national sporting press could respond only
in terms of baseball.“Japan was never converted to baseball,” argued The
Sporting News in its December 11, 1941, editorial. “They may have
acquired a little skill at the game, but the soul of our national game
never touched them. No nation which has had as intimate contact with
baseball as the Japanese, could have committed the vicious, infamous
deed of the early morning of December 7, 1941, if the spirit of the game
ever had penetrated their yellow hides.”
As the nation rallied to the war effort and the government reaffirmed
the indispensability of baseball, the very existence of the National
Football League remained in doubt. By May of 1942, 112 of the league's
346 players (32 percent) had been drafted into the armed forces, and

there was little hope that they would be replaced by college graduates.
From the league's Chicago office, Layden worked to keep his league
together, and prove its worthiness to the American effort. “While we
believe professional football has a definite place in the recreational
program of a nation at war,” said Layden, “nothing connected with it
should or will be permitted to hinder the war effort.” Average paid
attendance, which had topped 20,000 for the first time in 1941, fell to
16,144 in
1942. Despite the losses in fans and personnel, the league gave more
than any other sports organization to aid the war effort, contributing
$680,000 in 1942 alone.
But the manpower drain worsened and, even with rosters cut from
thirty-three men down to twenty-five, there was speculation in the
spring of 1943 that only three of the league's eight clubs would be able
to field a team for the season ahead. The Rams—with just eighteen
players left, and both Reeves and minority partner Fred Levy in the
service—were allowed to suspend operations for the 1943 season. Two
months later, the league announced it would go into the season with
eight teams, after the Pittsburgh Steelers and Philadelphia Eagles merged
for the season, to form the “Steagles.” Across the league, talent was
scarce. “We held tryouts at Cubs Park,”recalled Halas,“and signed up
anybody who could run around the field twice.”
In 1944, the Rams returned to action, the Eagles fielded their own
team, but the Steelers had to merge again, this time with the depleted
Chicago Cardinals. That amalgam, known as “Card.-Pitt.” in the
standings, and “the Carpets” around the league, lost all ten of its games.
The owners, always thrifty, became penurious during the war years. For
games in New York City, the Eagles traveled by coach train on the
morning of the game, to avoid hotel expenses, and ate their pregame
meal in the Bronx at Horn & Hardart, the chain of coin-operated
Automat delicatessens. When the Steelers came to New York, they did
stay at a hotel; but instead of chartering a bus to the game, a team
official would give each Steeler a nickel to take the subway to the Polo
Grounds, and another nickel, in the locker room after the game, to

return.
So the league fought manpower trouble, declining gates, and travel
restrictions for the balance of the war. And it operated in the shadow of
baseball, even in its oddities. The NFL's one-armed player (Jack Sanders,
who lost part of his left arm in an explosion at Iwo Jima) received only a
fraction of the attention of baseball's one-armed player (the St. Louis
Browns’ Pete Gray). Over the course of the war, 638 NFL players served
their country, 355 as commissioned officers, and nineteen players died
in combat.
For all that, pro football exhibited a remarkable resiliency.
Attendance, after falling in 1942, rebounded with a smaller schedule of
forty games in 1943 and, by 1944 topped a million for the fourth time in
league history. The NFL's fractious owners had persevered, hung
together, and retained hope that with the end of the war, their prospects
might brighten. Instead, by the end of 1944, they were preparing to face
another, more direct challenge, the greatest in the league's history.
During the war, the league received several applications from
prospective owners in Los Angeles, none of whom were more persistent
or serious than the urbane actor Don Ameche. In 1942, Ameche fronted
a Hollywood group that presented the league with a novel proposal.
Realizing that travel restrictions would be a prohibitive barrier to a Los
Angeles franchise during the war, Ameche's group offered to base the
team in Buffalo for the balance of the war, then move it to Los Angeles.
Though Arch Ward argued his friend Ameche's case privately with both
Layden and the Bears’ Halas, he couldn't convince them or the larger
group that the time was right to expand.
“We owners were a tight little group,” recalled Halas. “We had gone
through a lot together. We had helped one another. … We liked things
the way they were. We did our best to keep things that way. Looking
back I can see how our closed door was certain sooner or later to
produce trouble for us.”
From his bully pulpit as the author of the Tribune’s “In the Wake of the
News” sports column, and with the support of Tribune publisher Colonel
Joseph McCormick, Ward was the most influential sports editor in the
country. When his friend Ameche was turned down, Ward was livid. His

anger became the seed for the NFL's newest challenge.
On June 4, 1944, in St. Louis, Ward gathered a group of investors
from around the country to organize a new professional football league
that would challenge the NFL directly for players and fans. He
announced the formation of the All-America Football Conference a
month later, to banner headlines in the Chicago Tribune. The league
planned to begin in 1945 in eight or ten large cities, including
Cleveland, Chicago, New York, and Los Angeles. “All clubs are financed
by men of millionaire incomes,” wrote Ward, “who are prepared to
engage in a battle of dollars with the National Football League, if
necessary.” Shortly thereafter James “Sleepy Jim” Crowley, one of
Layden's partners in the Four Horsemen backfield, was installed as
commissioner. The All-America Football Conference was a logical step,
argued Ward, who noted that baseball's American League was founded
twenty-four years after the National League, and that the NFL had just
completed its twenty-fourth season.
At first, the established league's attitude was dismissive. “I did not
realize there was another league,” said the Redskins’ George Preston
Marshall, when asked about the AAFC, “although I did receive some
literature telling about a W.P.A. project.”
But the AAFC's legitimacy was soon clear. In February of 1945, the
new franchise in Cleveland announced that Ohio State coach Paul
Brown, by then serving his war duty by coaching a football powerhouse
at Great Lakes Naval Academy, would coach the Cleveland franchise
after the war. Three months later, the AAFC held a meeting in Chicago,
and Brown and Chicago Rockets owner John L. Keeshin were appointed
to represent the AAFC in seeking a meeting with Layden to discuss
“working agreements on a players’ draft, players’ salary limits,
schedules, inter-league games, anti-raiding policies, etc.”
When the Tribune called the NFL offices for comment about the
delegation, Strickler argued to Layden that he should make some kind of
statement explaining why he wouldn't meet with Brown and
Keeshin.“All I know is what I read in the newspaper,” Layden told the
press. “There is nothing for the National Football League to talk about as
far as new leagues are concerned until someone gets a football and plays
a game.”

The off-the-cuff comment, extensively reported at the time, would be an
element in Layden's eventual undoing. At a football luncheon attended
by both Crowley and Layden later in the spring, the AAFC commissioner
opened his remarks with a football under his arm, saying, “Look, we
have a football.” More than a year later, the quote and its rejoinder were
still reverberating. Paul Brown was one of several AAFC figures
photographed with dozens of footballs, next to the inevitable caption,
“Hey, Elmer, Now They've Got a Ball.”
Though the war forced the upstart league to delay its launch,
announcing early in 1945 that it wouldn't begin play until 1946, the
AAFC owners were better financed than those in the NFL. And Ward's
influence garnered them plenty of publicity.
So for the NFL, the 1945 season had the air of both prelude and
valediction. The giddy postwar aura of triumph and possibility was
there, but it coexisted alongside a deeper and broader sense of crisis,
that the league's very existence was again on the line. The tension would
lead to the extraordinary events in the first month following the 1945
season, marking the dawn of the modern age of pro football, expanding
the horizons of American sports, and setting the stage for the NFL's rapid
ascent over the next quarter century.
Among the cantankerous NFL owners, frequent rumbling about Elmer
Lay-den's performance had existed for years, and were exacerbated by
the rise of the AAFC. Many felt that Layden didn't have the stomach for a
good fight, especially one with his friend Arch Ward. But as late as the
title game in Cleveland, his job was considered secure. Then came the
news that Dan Topping, owner of the NFL's Brooklyn Dodgers, was
taking his team out of the league and joining the AAFC. Topping, who
also owned the New York Yankees in baseball, was one of the NFL's
wealthiest and most visible owners. Layden had been unable to settle the
squabble over Sunday home dates between Topping and Giants owner
Tim Mara.
The NFL's 1946 annual meetings were scheduled to start Friday,
January 11, at the Commodore Hotel in New York City. They in fact
began the night before that, when a group of owners gathered at the

Commodore and agreed among themselves not to renew Layden's
contract. The Redskins’ George Preston Marshall had arrived in New
York vowing, “Layden will be reelected over my dead body.” The next
day, when Layden banged the gavel to begin the meetings, he did so to
an empty conference room. Returning to his hotel room, he received
official word later that the owners had voted on his ouster.

“Layden was forced out,” Strickler explained years later, “because he
had not been able to bring himself around to using [his] power. Poor
Elmer really never got out of college. He had been brought up on and
could not break away from the amateur approach to football…. He was
just beginning to catch on when they dumped him.”
For their new commissioner, the owners drafted one of their own: Bert
Bell. By the end of the war, a series of financial setbacks had forced him
to sell the Eagles and take a minority position with Art Rooney's
Pittsburgh franchise. Among the best-liked owners in the league, Bell
also was the only one of the inner circle willing to give up his ownership
stake to take the job. With his partner Rooney remaining as the owner of
the Steelers, Bell accepted the owners’ offer of the $20,000-per-year job.
He was presiding on Saturday morning, January 12, when the 1946
annual meeting officially got underway, with Marshall formally
nominating Bell for the position he'd already accepted.
Then it was time for the owners to hear from the Rams. As Dan Reeves
sat quietly at the conference table, general manager Chile Walsh made a
passionate case that the league should allow the Cleveland Rams to
move their operations to Los Angeles.
Walsh reminded the owners that the Rams had suffered daunting
financial losses during the war, and lost money even in their
championship season. They now faced a challenge from the AAFC's
Cleveland contingent, likely to be the most formidable entry in the new
league. After years of planning for California, they had a chance of being
able to play in the Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum and had also, as a
fallback, inquired about the Cotton Bowl in Dallas. But the team, and the
league, needed to go to California now, Walsh argued, or else cede the
entire territory to the two AAFC teams—the Los Angeles Dons and San
Francisco 49ers—which would begin play in the fall of 1946.

Eight votes were needed to approve a transfer, but as in years past,
consensus could not be reached. Six teams supported the move, three
were opposed, and the Green Bay Packers abstained. As the voting was
completed, Dan Reeves stood up and spoke for the first time during the
meeting. “And you call this a national league?” he asked. “I suppose
Texas doesn't interest you, either?”

Halas, speaking for those opposed, explained that the owners didn't
want to face the exorbitant costs of traveling outside the league's
geographical area.
“If that's your final word,” Reeves said, turning to leave, “then I am no
longer a member of the National Football League. Consider the
Cleveland Rams out of pro football.”
This wasn't the first time, nor would it be the last, that an owner had
stormed out of a league meeting. But with the gravity of Reeves's
complaint, and the fresh memory of Topping's defection weighing heavy
on the occasion, Bell called a recess to his first meeting as commissioner.
Halas, Bidwill, and Marshall were dispatched to Reeves's hotel suite to
bring about a truce. Their initial entreaties were ignored, as Reeves
retreated to his bathroom and shouted, at one point, “It's either Los
Angeles or Dallas, or nothing.”
With that, the three other owners began discussing a way to
accommodate Reeves while addressing concerns over the heightened
travel expenses of West Coast trips. At 2:00 p.m., when the meetings
reconvened, they'd talked both Reeves and their partners into supporting
the move provided Reeves agreed to offer all visiting teams an extra
$5,000 above and beyond the $10,000 road team guarantee, for all
games in L.A. That afternoon the National Football League became
America's first truly national sports league, with franchises from coast to
coast.
As Reeves left the Commodore, he was beaming over the pending
move. “Now I just need to ratify the decision with my family.” In fact, he
was less concerned with the response of his wife and children than with
the reaction the Rams would get three days later in front of the Los
Angeles Coliseum Commission, which had effectively banned pro
football from its stadium for more than twenty years.

The NFL's record book shows a team in Los Angeles for a single season in
1926. In fact, the Los Angeles Buccaneers never played in Los Angeles.
They were based in Chicago, largely because they couldn't get
permission to use the Los Angeles Coliseum, where Red Grange had
played in front of 75,000 fans in his barnstorming tour with the Chicago
Bears the previous winter. Since then, there had been an unofficial ban
on pro teams at the Coliseum, whose governing commission—comprised
of three representatives from city, county, and state government—was
brimming with alums of Southern Cal and UCLA, two schools conscious
of maintaining college football's primacy on the West Coast.
Reeves had positioned himself to break that ban. Months earlier, he
had lined up an exhibition game at the Coliseum, to be played between
the Rams and Redskins in August 1946, with proceeds going to the Los
Angeles Times Charities. With that foot in the door, he felt that the move
would get a measure of support from Los Angeles political leaders. What
complicated matters was the other professional football applicant,
Ameche's Los Angeles Dons of the AAFC, who also wanted a contract to
play at the Coliseum.
For his part, Reeves had moved cautiously in the press, stating
carefully that the matter shouldn't be seen as one that pitted college
football against pro football, or one pro league against another. “If the
Coliseum commission wants to let another club in, that will be all right.
With the California climate, and lights in the Coliseum, there is no
reason the whole thing can't be worked out to everyone's satisfaction.”
When Coliseum Commission chairman Leonard Roach arrived at the
stadium for the hearing that Tuesday afternoon, January 15, 1946, he
was approached by three members of the black press, Halley Harding of
the Los Angeles Tribune and Herman Hill and J. C. Fentress of the
Pittsburgh Courier, the leading black newspaper of the era, which
promoted a “Double V” during the war, signifying victories over fascism
and imperialism in the war, and over racism at home.
As with major league baseball, pro football was segregated at the time,
not by rule or law, but by practice and custom. Numerous blacks had
played with the town and factory teams of the league's early years, but
since the 1933 season—when the black running back Joe Lillard played
for the Chicago Cardinals and a tackle named Ray Kemp saw action with

Pittsburgh—not a single black player had received so much as an
invitation to training camp, even during the desperate manpower
shortages during the war.
While the canard that blacks couldn't compete with whites was
preserved in baseball by segregation throughout the minor leagues, the
myth of white superiority was harder to maintain in football, where
blacks were starring for integrated college teams across the country,
excelling not just in exhibitions (as in baseball) but throughout the
season and in high-profile bowl games.
Few players had shone as brightly as UCLA's Kenny Washington in the
late ’30s. Washington led the nation in total offense in 1939 and Bob
Waterfield later described him as “the best football player I ever saw.”
Though a scoreless tie against Southern Cal in 1939 prevented UCLA
from going to the Rose Bowl, Washington received a standing ovation
from the sellout crowd of 103,000 at the Los Angeles Coliseum, a scene
that prompted syndicated columnist and future TV star Ed Sullivan to
write, “I have never been so moved emotionally, and rarely so proud of
my country.”
Jackie Robinson, who had been Washington's backfield mate at UCLA,
later called him “the greatest football player I have ever seen. He had
everything needed for greatness—size, speed and tremendous strength.
Kenny was probably the greatest long passer ever.”
Despite the acclaim and the accomplishments, Washington wasn't
selected in the 1940 NFL draft. In an “open letter” sent over the
airwaves that year, NBC broadcaster Sam Balter asked NFL owners why
none of them chose the player that most experts agreed was “not only
the best football player on the Pacific Coast this season, but the best of
the last ten years and perhaps the best in all that sport's glorious football
history—a player who had reduced to absurdity all the All-American
teams selected this year because they did not include him—and all know
why.”
When he traveled to Chicago to play in the College All-Star Game in
August 1940, Washington's performance prompted New York Daily News
columnist Jimmy Powers to call on New York owners Tim Mara and Dan
Topping to bring him into the league. “He played on the same field with

boys who are going to be scattered through the league,” wrote Powers.
“And he played against the champion Packers. There wasn't a bit of
trouble anywhere.” After the game, Washington recalled that the Bears’
Halas asked him to stick around Chicago for a week, “and he'd see what
he could do for me. I waited for about a week and then was told that he
couldn't use me.” For the next six seasons, Washington spent much of his
time playing for Paul Schissler and the Hollywood Bears in the Pacific
Coast League, where he injured his knee so badly he couldn't qualify for
active military duty. For the balance of the war, Washington played
sporadically for the Hollywood Bears and traveled on the USO tour,
making stops from Alaska to the Burma Road.
So when Roach arrived for the commission meeting, Harding and his
colleagues were ready, with the argument that those in the black press
would be opposed to opening up the Coliseum if the pros continued to
exclude athletes who, in Harding's words, “happen to be colored.”
“Well, fellows,” said Roach. “I am against Jim Crow, not only in pro
football but in all other forms.” Roach said the group should select a
representative, who would speak at the hearing.
At 2:45, in a packed conference room on the second floor of the
Coliseum's small administration building, the meeting was called to
order by Roach. The first order of new business was the use of the
Coliseum for professional football, and prepared statements were
delivered by Chile Walsh for the Rams and general manager Lloyd
Wright of the Dons, after which Roach asked if anyone else had anything
to say.
At that, the immaculately dressed Harding rose to his feet and
addressed the gathering, with a calmly eloquent oratory about the
injustice of racial segregation in sports. He spoke first of the long history
of Negro athletes in pro football, invoking the names of Fritz Pollard,
Paul Robeson, Sol Butler, and Duke Slater, all standout professionals in
the NFL of the ’20s, who were later excluded from the league.
Harding pointed out that blacks had been excluded from the NFL for
more than a decade, and he blamed the Redskins’ segregationist owner
George Preston Marshall for keeping the racial barrier up on a leaguewide basis. Then he cited the case of UCLA's Kenny Washington, and

argued that it was “singularly strange that he had never been signed by
any team in the National League.” Before finishing, Harding reminded
the meeting that blacks had fought for American freedoms overseas, and
now deserved those same freedoms at home.

As Harding sat down, an electric silence filled the room. Commission
member Roger W. Jessup asked if it was true that no team in pro
football would play with or against “our Kenny Washington.” Another
board member, John Anson Ford, praised Harding for his stand.
Asked to respond to Harding's speech, Chile Walsh at first repeated
what others in the league had long claimed—that there was no written
rule against blacks playing in the NFL. But then he went a crucial step
further.
“Kenny Washington is invited by me at this moment to try out for the
Los Angeles Rams team,” Walsh said. He added, “I will submit a
gentleman's agreement that if you can deliver me Buddy Young on
completion of his graduation from the University, I will sign him.”
Young, then preparing for his senior season at Illinois, was considered
one of the country's best running backs. Two weeks later, the
commission voted unanimously to approve the Rams’ petition.
And so on May 4 as promised, the Rams signed Washington to a threeyear contract. Later in the summer they signed another black player, his
Pacific Coast League teammate Woody Strode, an end from Illinois.
Neither would have much of an impact on the game. Washington's knees
had been ravaged more than anyone knew. Strode, at thirty, also was
past his prime (and already well along on his career in acting). But that
fall, the two men would make the team, and play, without a major
public racial incident, effectively reintegrating the NFL.
So in a matter of days in January 1946, the National Football League
had moved west, at a time when Major League Baseball's horizons were
still bound by the Mississippi River. And the league integrated, with
little national fanfare, at a time when Jackie Robinson was still toiling in
the minor leagues for the Dodgers’ AAA farm club, the Montreal Royals.
In July, the Los Angeles Rams reported for training camp. Though a
movie star owned the rival Dons, the big stars were with the Rams.
Waterfield's marriage to Russell had made plenty of headlines, and

teammate Tom Harmon had taken up with Hollywood starlet Elyse
Knox.
That summer, the Rams held their training camp at Compton Junior
College, a few miles south of downtown Los Angeles, and site of one of
the most powerful junior college athletic programs in the country. Each
of Los Angeles’ six major dailies covered the early days of camp at
Compton, with predictably suggestive asides about Waterfield's wife (“I
venture to say,” wrote the Times’s Vincent X. Flaherty, “that if Daniel
Farrell Reeves can promote Russell into assuming that billboard posture
of Sabbath afternoons, he will pack the whole coliseum and will have
wild young men spilling over the walls”).
The most prominent of L.A. sportswriters, Times editor Paul
Zimmerman, showed up to file as well. He was one of many to be
impressed by the crack job done by the Rams’ publicity staff, which was
aided by personnel from Comp-ton, including a lanky, tanned, amiable
student assistant, who seemed particularly adept, dispatching the daily
news briefings, always willing to help the writers with whatever they
needed.
“That kid you've got is good,” Zimmerman mentioned to Goldie
Holmes, Compton's athletic director, at camp one day. “What's his
name?”
Holmes informed him that the young man who delivered the hot
coffee, made sure the press releases were free of typos, and was even
then working on the paste-up pages for the Rams’ intrasquad game
program, was a well-mannered, whip-smart Compton College student,
recently back from the war, by the name of Pete Rozelle.

