SOURCE_ID: americas_game_chapter_02
SOURCE_TYPE: book
AUTHOR: Michael MacCambridge
SECTION: Chapter 2

2 The Organization Man

At 8:30 in the morning, Monday, July 29, 1946, at the Alpha Xi Delta
sorority house on the campus of Bowling Green University, fortynine football players sat in seven neat rows of desks, arranged in
alphabetical order. The name of each player was written on masking
tape, affixed to the front-facing backrest of each chair, so the speaker
standing in front of the room could tell at a glance who was missing or
late. On this morning, all the seats were filled, and had been for several
minutes.
Standing in front of the classroom, dressed in brown pleated slacks, a
crisply pressed white T-shirt, and a baseball cap, Paul Brown looked out
at the assembled players and, as the second hand swept across the 12,
began his first address to the Cleveland Browns football team with the
words, “Call me Paul.”
His voice was an arid, Midwestern tenor, free of accent or
flamboyance, but tinged with an edge of precise rectitude, and the
clipped cadences of a former English teacher, which he was. “We will be
the most amateur team in professional sports,” he vowed. “I don't want
fellows who are strictly professional. I don't want you to think of the
money you'll be making; rather I want you to think of the game first and
the money second. We'll start just as we started when I coached at
Massillon. It'll be just like it was there, at Ohio State and at Great Lakes,
and those of you who were with me at those places know exactly what I
mean. We'll coach the pro team the same way we coached the others.
That means we'll start on the ground floor with fundamentals.” That

meant the afternoon session would be devoted not to the first practice
but instead a lecture instructing the team how it would conduct its
practices, followed by a test run through calisthenics.
In an era when most pro football training camps were ragged, casual
affairs, Brown's approach was not a departure so much as a
counterattack, a repudiation of a quarter-century's worth of business-asusual in the sport.
Later that morning, the assistant coaches distributed green three-ring
binders, and Brown explained that all the plays and terminology they
would learn in the weeks ahead would be copied down by each player.
“Everything we do, everything expected of you, will go in here,” he said.
“I will call in the notebooks without warning. They will be graded. A
sloppy notebook means a sloppy player. Star or rookie, you will be
gone.”
The remainder of Brown's morning speech summarized the
unprecedented social contract between a professional football coach and
his players. In it, he laid out the rules that his players would be expected
to live by, not just during training camp but throughout the season.
“Don't set up any love nests in Cleveland,” he warned. “We're going to
find out where you live. If you sneak out after bed checks you'll be fined
and you'll read about it in the paper, and I'll be the first to tell your wife.
Keep your wives out of football. Don't have your wife talk football with
other wives. It breeds trouble. I don't want one wife complaining to the
wife of the quarterback that her husband is being overlooked as a pass
receiver.
“I ask you to wear a sport shirt to dinner. At the table, keep the meal
enjoyable … it's no place for pigs…. Try to avoid cliques. Know all your
teammates. Class always shows.”
And in closing, the purposeful man gave his team a clear goal.
“I want this team to be the darling of professional football,” he said.
“We're starting from scratch, and I want you to think in terms of being
the best. We'll settle for nothing less than a winner. When you think of
baseball, you immediately think of the New York Yankees. When you
think of golf, Bobby Jones comes to mind. When you think of boxing, it's
Joe Louis. One of these days when people think of football, I want them

to think of the Cleveland Browns.”
What would in fact happen, in the coming years, was that when
people would think of football, they would think of Paul Brown. The
head coaching job in Cleveland, which he'd accepted in the spring of
1945, was the last in an audacious series of jumps that had taken him
from a just-graduated newly wed, coaching at an obscure prep school in
1931 to the pinnacle of his profession, in just fifteen years. For the next
decade, his team would dominate professional football and his methods
would reshape it. The program that he set in place in Cleveland was the
culmination of an adult life spent viewing football not as a sport but a
field of study, worthy of the fine and close attention of academic
inquiry. Others would have to learn to do the same if they hoped to
compete.
Massillon, Ohio, lay just eight miles to the west of Canton, connected
by the old State Highway 30 and the kind of fraternal competition
between close communities that has fueled sports rivalries for ages.
Canton in the early twentieth century was both a political hotbed
(hometown to President William McKinley) and an industrial center, full
of steel mills and other factories. Its neighbor Massillon, where Paul
Brown grew up, was a bustling steel town and port city, lying on the
heart of the old Ohio & Erie Canal, which connected the Ohio River and
Lake Erie. Brown's parents, Lester and Ida, had moved to Massillon, for
Lester's job as a telegrapher and chief dispatcher on the Wheeling & Lake
Erie Railway.
Young Paul Brown was just 120 pounds when he went out for the
Massil-lon Washington High School football team in the August prior to
his freshman year. By his junior year, he was the starting quarterback, a
140-pound package of preternatural authority and intelligence. During
his senior season, Brown was suggesting substitutions, and head coach
Dave Stewart was listening. “He was like a banty rooster, full of
authority and self-confidence,” said Stewart. “When he was my
quarterback, his voice rang with inspiration as he called the plays. The
kids believed in him and he ran them like a Napoleon.”
By the time he'd graduated from college, at Miami University in
Oxford, Ohio, Brown had begun to doubt whether he really wanted to
fulfill his father's wishes of becoming a lawyer. Instead of law school, he

accepted a teaching job at Severn, a naval preparatory school in
Maryland, where he'd also be able to coach the football team.
His course was set. Within two years, he returned to Massillon as head
coach, and proceeded to turn the moribund program into the premier
football power in the state, compiling an 80-8-2 record over nine
seasons. It was during these years that Brown's innovative coaching
techniques, and his competitive urge to acquire quality players, began
engendering both respect and resentment. Len Dawson, who'd later play
for Brown in the pros, recalled growing up in nearby Alliance, Ohio.
“There were rumors back in high school that he'd have telephone repair
people coming over here to our practice facilities at Alliance High School
to see what we were doing.”
One key to Brown's success was his ability to elicit a community-wide
dedication to the game. The booster club drew 2,500 fans to the regular
Monday night dinners. In his final season at Massillon, 1940, the Tigers
drew 182,500 people to their ten games.
Late that year, the most visible coaching job in the state opened up,
and Paul Brown was named the head football coach at Ohio State. He
found instant success, going 6-1 his first season, then winning the
national championship in 1942. He was perfectly suited for the college
life, with its strict schedules, malleable athletes, and frenzied school
spirit, and with the football team at the absolute center of the school's
social whirl.
In 1943, with many of his front-line players drafted or enlisted in the
military, Brown suffered his first losing season as a coach, capped by a
painful blowout loss to Michigan. The lesson he learned, of the ultimate
importance of personnel—“You've got to have a phenomenal animal”—
would remain with him for the rest of his career. The next year, 1944, he
entered the service himself, taking what was to be a temporary leave
from Ohio State. He was placed as the athletic director and football
coach of the Great Lakes Naval Station outside Chicago, where in two
years he led the school to upset wins over several national powers.
He also developed a reputation as a man who was not to be trifled
with. He abstained from drinking from the first day of training camp
until the end of each season, also giving up gin rummy and golf during

the campaign. “Paul was a stickler for details,” remembered Marion
Motley, who first played for Brown at Great Lakes. “Paul was sitting on a
train one Sunday afternoon at the same time me and another player, a
young kid, were sitting in another train on the same track. We were
going out on liberty. This kid I was with didn't see Paul. But Paul saw
him. The kid had a cigarette in his hand. On Monday morning, Paul fired
the kid. They sent him to Iwo Jima, I think.”
Many Ohio State fans were surprised in 1945 when Brown announced
that he was taking a job coaching a pro team, and a fledgling one at
that. But those who knew him best understood his smoldering
resentment over his perceived mistreatment at the hands of the school
administration and athletic director Lyn St. John (whom, Brown felt,
welcomed him back to his old job with less enthusiasm than was
warranted). Then, too, there was Cleveland entrepreneur Mickey
McBride's pitch: a $1,500 a month retainer for the remainder of the war,
a $25,000 salary commencing with his discharge from the navy, and a 5
percent stake in the team.
But what Brown found irresistible was the opportunity to create his
own team, from the ground up, and then concentrate exclusively on
football. Rather than fitting in practices for students who were spending
most of their time taking college classes, or preparing for naval training,
his players would take classes in football, and prepare solely for football
games.
To appreciate what a revolutionary Brown was in the ’40s, it helps to
understand not just the sport's humble beginnings but its brutal, and at
times sluggish, development. For twenty-five years, George Halas and
some of the more enlightened caretakers of the game had been seeking
to rescue football from the worst excesses of its own inherent brutality,
the monotonous repetition of roughneck factory workers engaging in
monster scrums—a delight for the factory workers, but less interesting
for spectators. In the ’30s, the sport was, in the words of historian Robert
Smith, locked in “the thralldom of tradition that seemed to have doomed
it to remain, especially if the field were wet, a slam-bang, grunt-groan,
pull-devil, pull-baker affair that was occasionally less fun to watch than
an honest wrestling match.”
The forward pass rules, liberalized in 1933, had helped, and the

innovations of T formation mastermind Clark Shaughnessy, with Ralph
Jones's man-in-motion wrinkles (which moved more action away from
the congested center of the field), had brought a greater element of
strategy and grace to the game. As personified by the Bears’ epochal 73–
0 rout of the Redskins in the 1940 NFL title game, and the Shaughnessycoached Stanford team's 21–13 win over Nebraska in the Rose Bowl
weeks later, football took on an aspect of artful dodging, with
quarterbacks like Stanford's Frankie Albert duping teams with nimble
spins and well-concealed fakes.
The T helped to civilize the game further because it put an even
greater emphasis on skill and speed over raw strength. Quarterbacks had
a wider array of faking options, and with the quickness in getting the
ball-carrier to the hole, blocking became a more nuanced process of
delaying or interfering with a defender rather than flattening him.
Personnel were still crucial, but strategy and tactics mattered as well.
And the glimpses of this game, while still rough, encouraged the sort of
spectacular action and dense strategy that was rarely combined in any
single sport.
While Halas and Shaughnessy worked on tactics, Brown was
convinced that the principles of organization, never observed in a
systematic way in the sport, could make the difference. In this way, he
was part of a civilizing continuum, helping to bring intelligence, skill,
and strategy to the game.
Throughout the war, as the T formation gained prominence in
playbooks at every level of football, coaches everywhere were
scrambling to adjust and understand it. Brown, like so many other
single-wing coaches at the start of the ’40s, was forced to play catch-up.
He coached the single-wing throughout his time at Ohio State but upon
arriving at Great Lakes, decided to experiment with the T, and spent
some time attending Bears practices.
Brown was still in the military when he accepted the Cleveland job, but
through assistant John Brickels he engaged in a remarkably
comprehensive recruitment of talent, searching far and wide to find the
“high-class people” he was looking for to fill his football team. The

circumstances were extraordinary; Brown could not have built up such
an arsenal of players limited by the strictures of a draft in an established
league. Nor, under a less benevolent and less wealthy owner, would he
have been able to offer the salaries and monthly retainers that McBride
was willing to pay.

While colleges waited for their stars to return to campus, Brown
sought out players who'd played for him or against him, and wrote them
to ask them to consider turning pro. The letters he sent came as part of
the standard military mail call, small slips in the mountains of
information, care packages, mash notes, and correspondence that
crisscrossed the globe during World War II. The letters bore the return
address of the new franchise, 405 N. Leader Building in downtown
Cleveland, and contained a personal letter from Paul Brown. The offers
that accompanied the contracts weren't just generous, but unique: a
retainer for players of $250 per month for the balance of the war, a
signing bonus of as much as $2,500, and salaries up to $7,500.
Brown didn't march out and try to sign a dream team of AllAmericans. He had kept a dossier on the players he coached and played
against at Massil-lon, Ohio State, and Great Lakes, and these were the
primary contacts he used to assemble his squad. He started with his
quarterback. Brown was convinced that to run the T effectively, a team
needed a quarterback who was both a natural leader and an all-around
athlete. When the time came in 1945 to start assembling a pro team,
Brown sought for his quarterback “an artist throwing the ball; a
particular kind of guy; a quick thinker; a finesse man.” Typical of his
vision for the game, the man Brown had in mind for his T formation
quarterback had never played the position before.
The only loss Brown's Ohio State team suffered in 1941 was an upset
at the hands of Pappy Waldorf's undermanned Northwestern team. The
key play was engineered by Otto Graham, the Wildcats’ star tailback.
With the score tied, Graham took a deep snap from his tailback position
in the single-wing, and followed a wall of blockers toward the left on
what looked like an end run. Stopping nimbly and squaring his
shoulders, Graham threw a long touchdown pass across his body and
down the right sideline. Brown never forgot it, and he sensed that
Graham possessed the ideal blend of skills for the position.

With a shock of close-cropped black hair and thick eyebrows that set
off a sharply handsome face, Graham was a terrific athlete and model
student, clean as milk, who seemed to excel at everything he pursued.
Invited to Northwestern on a basketball scholarship, he was also a multiinstrumentalist adept at the piano, the violin, the cornet, and the French
horn, which he played for one year in the Northwestern student
orchestra.
After graduating early, Graham went to Carolina Pre-Flight, as part of
the navy's V-12 flying program, where he was contacted by Brown, who
signed him to a $7,500 contract, with a $250 monthly stipend during the
balance of his time in the military.
Once Graham was signed, Brown cast a wide net for players in service
around the globe. Lou Groza was working with a medical battalion
stationed on Mindoro, preparing for the invasion of the Japanese
mainland, when he received Brown's contract offer. Groza had impressed
Brown with his placekicking skills before joining the service after his
sophomore year, and soon after signing his contract received two
footballs by mail. Without any goalposts, Groza worked on perfecting his
accuracy, spending hours at a time aiming for a spot at the very top of a
tree. In the Philippines, where Lin Houston's company commander had
to witness his signature, he looked at the contract and said, “Kid, if you
don't sign it, I will. You'll be making more than me, and you're only a
private.” Brown would also court Dante Lavelli, who served nearly three
years with the 28th Infantry Division, where he fought in the Battle of
the Bulge.
Though each player's original freshman class had graduated, Lavelli,
Houston, and Groza—along with Gene Fekete and George Cheroke—all
had college eligibility remaining at Ohio State. It was inevitable that the
players Brown was recruiting would return as much more mature and
less credulous than they'd been as schoolboys. When the news came that
Brown was signing players with college eligibility left, his separation
from Ohio State developed into outright antagonism.
“Ohio State is counting itself exceedingly fortunate in having Paul
Brown eliminate himself from the university picture,” wrote St. John in
a letter published in Ohio State's monthly alumni magazine and reported
in the Cleveland newspapers.

“Keep in mind that I am the same Paul Brown whom they claimed to
have offered $15,000 annually to remain there a year ago,” Brown shot
back a day later. “Maybe the series of events that followed my leaving
might give some insight as to why I really left. St. John is a bitter foe of
pro football and I seem to be in the middle of the two.”
With the Rams’ move to Los Angeles, Brown had the Cleveland market
all to himself. By the middle of the summer, the team was even bearing
his name. An early name-the-team contest had resulted in the club
announcing, in the spring of 1946, that it would be known as the
Cleveland Panthers. But when the owner of a failed minor league
franchise of the ’30s claimed rights to the name, Brown decided to ditch
it. “We don't want to have any association with a loser,” he said,
ultimately agreeing to let the team use the most common name
suggested by the fans, Cleveland Browns.
Brown didn't wait until the players arrived at Bowling Green. His
letter, sent two months prior to the opening day speech, outlined what
they could expect.
“Regardless of how good a friend of mine you might be or how much
of a football name you might have, it means nothing when it comes to
making this football team. To make the squad you must earn the right….
“We will take our football players on the lean and hungry side. Our
team is based on SPEED. I feel certain that you will know what I'm
talking about when we get down to work.”
To help him, he'd assembled a staff of six assistants, the largest in pro
football. The last addition to the staff was Blanton Collier, the veteran
high school coach from Paris, Kentucky, whom Brown had met at Great
Lakes. The two men seemed particularly well suited, with the gentle,
amiable Collier—a classic teacher in the true sense of the word—
bringing just as much intellectual curiosity to the pursuit of coaching as
Brown.
At Bowling Green, the regimen quickly set in: a fire bell rang at 7:00
a.m. to wake the players, breakfast was served at 7:30, practice was at
9:30, lunch at noon, more practice at 3:00 p.m., dinner at 6:15, meetings
to follow after, players in the dormitory at 10:00 p.m., in bed by 10:30.

Brown was hardly the first coach to run organized practices, or to give
chalk talks, or to use film study, or to station men in the press box
during games. But in each of these areas, his attention to detail was
more thorough than anyone else in professional football. And because
he'd carefully selected his players, and paid them well, he had a willing
squad to work with, a group of players more talented to begin with than
any other in the AAFC.
On the third day of practice, Brown installed his first play, an offtackle run. From then through the next three weeks, the schedule
remained the same. In the evening, the team would take notes on a
running play, which would be installed and practiced the next morning.
The afternoon meetings would explain the passing play, which then was
inserted that afternoon. The evening session would review the progress
and assignments of that day, then introduce a new running play to be
installed the next morning.
Brown drew from outside accepted football practices to prepare and
judge his players. From the military, he adapted the army intelligence
test, a twelve-minute, fifty-question multiple-choice examination given
to players at the beginning of training camp. He'd later become the first
coach in pro football to conduct psychological testing, designed to reveal
not raw intelligence but drive, determination, and the ability to sacrifice
for the good of the group. (These early attempts in this area provided
specious results.) Intent on building a fast team, he began timing players
in the 40-yard dash, rather than the 100, reasoning that the 40 was a
more meaningful measure of true football speed, about the distance a
player would cover on a punt.
“There was a total positive attitude in everything Paul did,” recalled
Blanton Collier. “Everything was planned to the minutest detail. For the
first four or five years of the eight I was with him in Cleveland, each
player and coach wrote everything that was in the playbook. I mean, we
sat there and wrote down what he dictated to us. Each coach had to
write out what he was going to teach. Then you dictated that to the
players and they wrote it in longhand. That meant drawing up every
play that went into our system. Nothing was left to chance.”

When the Browns reported to camp in late July, there were no black
players on any AAFC roster. Marion Motley, Brown's star fullback at
Great Lakes, had written a letter to Brown in the spring of 1945, asking
for a tryout, but received a note telling him the team had enough
running backs. Bill Willis, an All-America lineman at Ohio State under
Brown, had written him the previous fall, and Brown said he'd contact
him later. After not hearing from Brown for nearly a year, Willis agreed
to play with the Montreal Alouettes in the Canadian Football League,
though he had not yet signed a contract.
Willis was preparing to leave for Canada when he got a call from Paul
Hor-nung, the Columbus Dispatch sports editor and friend of Brown's,
requesting that he come to the Browns’ camp. “We'll try him at guard
and if he proves that he hasn't lost his old fire and speed, we'll definitely
sign him,” Brown told the Cleveland Press. “He'll do us a lot of good if he
still has it. He was like a black panther when he was playing for me at
Ohio.”
Willis still had it. He reported to camp on August 6 and his impact was
felt instantly. As the Browns began scrimmaging that day, Willis, lined
up just off the shoulder of center Mike “Mo” Scarry, came off the ball so
quickly he consistently reached Graham before the quarterback could
pivot away from center. Scarry charged that Willis was jumping offside,
but after Brown and his assistants kneeled on hands and knees so they
could look straight down the line of scrimmage, they confirmed his
charge was legal.
Later in the month, Brown arranged for Motley to show up at Bowling
Green and “ask” for a tryout. This was another contrivance, as Brown
had asked a friend of his in Canton to contact Motley and drive him to
camp. For the fullback, married and supporting a family of four, it may
have been a last chance at carving out a life outside a steel mill. He
didn't waste it.
Brown later claimed that he had decided, even before Branch Rickey
signed Jackie Robinson to a contract in August 1945, that he wanted
both Willis and Motley on his team, and that he waited until training
camp had already started to summon them to reduce the pressure each
man would face. While his orchestration of their signing was certainly
calculated, his claim seems difficult to square with other facts. As Dan

Daly and Bob O'Donnell relate in The Pro Football Chronicle, Willis was
signed at a time when the Browns had not a single guard with
professional experience, and Motley came to the Browns after fullback
Gene Fekete had been hurt in a scrimmage and another fullback, Ted
Fritsch, had asked to be released so he could return to the Green Bay
Packers. Brown never informed Willis or Motley of his plans, and
because of that came close to losing Willis to the CFL. Years later, Brown
would remark to the writer Mickey Herskowitz that it had been Collier
who was agitating for him to bring in Motley.
Whatever the motivations, the method did result in less scrutiny being
placed on either Willis or Motley—as well as less criticism being directed
at Brown than if he'd taken a more publicly active position, similar to
Rickey's, or even Reeves, who'd announced the signing of Washington
and Strode months earlier.
With the last two key players in camp, the Browns continued to build
toward the regular season in a calm, methodical fashion. Brown had too
many quality players for the thirty-three-man roster. Rather than waive
them to other teams in the AAFC, he devised a secret plan with owner
McBride by which several players who had been cut would land jobs
with the Zone/Yellow Cab Co., with schedules arranged so that they
could report to League Park in Cleveland, where the Browns practiced.
Thus was born the “taxi squad” in pro football.
During the Rams years, Cleveland had gained a reputation as a bad
football town. But the steady drumbeat of publicity that Brown's name
engendered had raised interest to record levels, guaranteeing weeks in
advance that the Browns’ first game would be played in front of the
largest crowd for a regular season game in pro football history.
Less than a year after losing a champion with which they never
developed a bond, Cleveland's fans now seemed prepared to embrace an
untested startup team as their own.
The AAFC season opener was played on a Saturday night, September
5, at Cleveland Stadium, and drew 60,135 fans, nearly equalling the
Rams’ home attendance for the entire 1945 regular season. The fans saw
a smartly dressed Browns team—brown jerseys with orange numerals,
outlined in white block-shadow, white pants, and shiny white helmets—

storm onto the field as the marching band of 120, including bandleader
George “Red” Bird's 30 Marching Majorettes, serenaded them with
brassy music.
The game was covered by Life magazine and other representatives of
the national press, who left duly impressed with the new league and its
marquee team.“About $10,000 worth of fireworks were exploded,”wrote
Jimmy Powers in the New York Daily News. “A leggy chorus of
devastating beauties knocked the customers dizzy with intricate midfield
ballet work that can be compared only to New York's Radio City
Rockettes. A new automobile was given away as a door prize…. A
midget [Tommy Flynn, the team's “Brownie” mascot] led a swing
orchestra through the latest hit parade and two French chefs with white
mushroom hats appeared in the press box and proceeded to carve giant
roasts of beef.”
The game itself was an embarrassing mismatch. Faster, stronger, and
much better prepared, the Browns coasted to a 44–0 victory over the
Miami Sea-hawks.
The Browns outclassed their opposition, rolling through their first six
games by a combined score of 149–20, and it wasn't until their seventh
game, at home against the Los Angeles Dons, that they trailed at
halftime. Motley stormed through the Dons for touchdown runs of 47
and 68 yards in the second half, en route to a 31–14 win. Dons coach
Dudley DeGroot (who the year before had coached the Redskins to the
NFL title game) remarked that Motley was “the greatest I've ever seen. A
fullback that can run that fast when he gets out, and won't be tackled by
only one man, when you have that you have something.”
The Browns had something else: a passing attack more sophisticated
than any other team in the league, and a willingness to throw in any
situation, at a time when many coaches were still adhering to the belief
that teams should never throw within their own 20-yard line, and some
teams still punted or quick-kicked rather than try to advance the ball on
third-and-long. Graham took over the starting quarterback job from Cliff
Lewis after three games, and went on to earn All-League honors as a
rookie. After two losses in the middle of the season, the Browns rolled
through the rest of the regular season schedule without being pressed,
finishing 12-2 and drawing a professional record of 339,962 fans for the

seven regular season home games.
While Graham was the natural team leader at quarterback, the
offensive key to the team was Motley, who forced defenses to bunch up
for the run, leaving them more vulnerable to the pass. On the other side
of the line, Willis was just as dominant, seeming to play the game in a
different gear than other linemen.
During the opening rout of the Seahawks, Miami was as confounded
by Willis's speed as Mo Scarry had been upon Willis's arrival in training
camp. Reports circulated of Willis's quickness, marking the first of
countless occasions in the postwar era in which a black player's
excellence in pro football was attributed to athletic ability. But Willis
was in fact small for the position, at 6-foot-2, 210 pounds; the key to his
rush was his attention to the minutest movements in the center's fingers,
and a series of sluicing swim moves to evade blocks that made him one
of the canniest linemen of his era.
When the Browns traveled to Miami to face the woeful Seahawks later
in the season, Motley and Willis stayed back in Cleveland because of a
Florida state law that prohibited whites and blacks from competing on
the same field. (The Browns routed the Seahawks again, 34–0.) Motley
and Willis encountered racism in virtually every game they played.
“There were times in games when I'd be punched by an opponent after a
play, or called a black S.O.B.,” recalled Willis. “Lou [Groza] and Lou
Rymkus, another lineman, said to me, ‘Don't let anybody excite you. If
there's trouble, tell us. We'll handle it.’ I never had to say anything. We
were in the trenches together and they'd know. And the two would take
care of the guy. It was comforting to have teammates like that, believe
me.”
“That kind of crap went on for two or three years,” said Motley, “until
they found out what kind of players we were. They found out that while
they were calling us ‘niggers,’ I was running for touchdowns and Willis
was knocking the shit out of them. They stopped calling us names and
started to catch up with us.”
The team's organizational innovations didn't end with training camp.
With the largest coaching staff in pro football, Brown could afford to

spare one assistant, Red Conkright, to serve as an advance scout,
traveling on weekends to the game of Cleveland's next opponent.
Conkright's scouting reports were incorporated into the weekly game
plans that Brown distributed to the team. Writing it up and
mimeographing it Tuesday night to be handed out at Wednesday's
meetings, the “Brown News” could run up to twenty-five pages.

While Conkright's analysis was given plenty of weight, Collier's input
frequently was crucial. At Great Lakes, Collier's scouting and game plan
abilities had been instrumental in the team's upset of Notre Dame in
1943. He was equally effective in the pros; after the Browns suffered
their first loss of the 1946 season, a 34–20 defeat at the hands of San
Francisco, Collier devoted extra time to dissecting films from the game.
Two weeks later, when the teams met again in San Francisco, Cleveland
shut down the 49ers and Frankie Albert, 14–7.
Cleveland's practices during the week were the least physical in the
sport. Pro teams typically gave their players Mondays off, but Brown
gave his players Monday and Tuesday off, allowing the staff more time
to review the previous game and assemble the scouting report for the
next opponent. Wednesdays and Saturdays called for short run-throughs.
Thursday and Friday were the busiest days, with extensive film study
and game plan meetings in the morning, and practices in the afternoon.
Each practice—scheduled at 1:00 p.m. to coincide with kickoff times on
Sunday—began with tackling drills, but no other significant physical
contact. “A coach who scrimmages doesn't know how to teach,” Brown
said, keenly aware that virtually every other coach in the game
scrimmaged at least once a week during the season.
As in training camp, Brown attempted to cast his influence far beyond
the field. “Paul was the one who originated the Tuesday rule,” said Otto
Graham. “No sex with your wives after Tuesday night…. ‘Save yourself
for the game,’ he'd tell us. We kidded about that. I guess it shows the
morality of that time. Paul didn't recognize that sex existed outside the
marriage. I kept asking him, ‘What about the single men?’ and Paul
never answered.”
During the season, the night before home games, he brought the
Browns together in the Hotel Carter. The team would eat dinner
together, then attend a movie before returning to the hotel for the night,

with a kiss good night to wives and girlfriends (invited to the movies,
but excluded from the dinner) in the Carter lobby. On the road, Brown
followed the same procedure, and discouraged sightseeing. “This is a
business trip, nothing more, nothing less,” he said.
On game days, the team was rested and focused, having been spared
any rigorous physical contact during the week, and after spending much
of the last twenty-four hours before kickoff together. The pregame
speeches were terse and usually dispassionate. Brown might say, “Say
your prayers, and let's get going,” and leave it at that.

The first AAFC championship game, played against Dan Topping's New
York Yankees (who had been renamed after bolting from the NFL after
the 1945 season), would prove another example, as if one were needed,
of Brown's absolute authority.
After the team returned from its regular-season-ending 66–14 win at
Brooklyn, lineman and team captain Jim Daniell hit the town with Lou
Rymkus and Mac Speedie. Pulling up behind a police car, Daniell laid on
the horn in an attempt to have the officer move. When the officer got
out of his car to investigate, the ensuing confrontation landed the
belligerent Daniell at the station, on a drunk-and-disorderly charge. The
next morning, as the team gathered in the locker room after practice,
Brown confronted Daniell in front of the team.
“Is what I read in the paper true?” Brown asked. Daniell confirmed
that it was.
“Fine,” said Brown. “Turn in your suit.”
“Don't you want to hear my side of the story?” asked Daniell.
“No, you're through.”
Daniell was kicked off the team less than forty-eight hours before the
AAFC championship game. Rymkus and Speedie, both key starters, were
let off with a stern warning.
“We were a young team and Paul had us in the palm of his hand after
that,” Otto Graham later explained. “We thought, if he could do that to
Jim Daniell, he'd do it to anyone. Daniell's backup was a lineman who
was just about as good as Jim. But I didn't realize that until later. What

Paul did was get a message across to us, and not hurt the team, either.
For years, veteran players told rookies about the day Paul Brown cut Jim
Daniell, and that just made him even bigger and more powerful in the
eyes of the young players.”

The game itself was a tightly fought contest, with the Yankees, though
out-gained 315 yards to 146, laboring heroically, to lead 3–0 after a
quarter and 9–7 at the end of the third period, before Graham led the
Browns on the game-winning drive late in the fourth quarter. At the end
of the game, with the 40,000 in attendance storming the field, Brown's
players lifted their coach to their shoulders and marched him into the
locker room. His players’ winning shares were $931.57, with the
deposed Daniell voted a full share.
Afterward, Brown seemed more relieved than thrilled, remarking,“It
was a long afternoon.” But he was satisfied with his first year of
professional football, and not reluctant to discuss the implications. “For
the players’ sake, too,” he said, “I'm tickled with that victory. But my
satisfaction is in proving that the same ideas and ideals that won in high
school and college can win, too, in pro ball. That makes me happy.”
One more important element of the game would change under Brown
in that first year. Prior to 1946, it was common for head coaches and
their assistants to take four to six months away from football, working
off-season jobs in the winter and spring. Brown was convinced that if he
could pay his assistants enough to work year-round, as they did at the
largest college programs (where recruiting made it a necessity), there
was an edge to be gained in doing so.
After the season, Blanton Collier headed home to his house in
Kentucky with films from all fifteen games of the 1946 season, a handcrank projector and a special viewer that would allow him to magnify
part of the picture and examine a single player on the film one frame at
a time. Squirreling himself away for long days and evenings in an
upstairs room in the family's home, Collier examined every Cleveland
player's performance on every play of the previous season.
Collier's job was twofold. First, he would combine the grades of each
player on each play to come up with a percentage of made and missed
assignments—he and Brown determined that a player needed to

complete his assignment at least 80 percent of the time to be successful.
The second was the grand analysis that Brown had dreamed of, and
that Collier executed. By cataloguing each play the team called, Brown
and Collier could see how a particular play had done over the course of
the season.
One example: The team's “24” play, an off-tackle slant with the left
halfback, was run 27 times during the 1946 season, gaining a total of
102 yards, or 3.77 yards per carry. Three of the plays resulted in
touchdowns. On the reasoning that a perfectly executed play should
always result in a touchdown, the other 24 were considered failures.
Collier's careful analysis revealed the reasons for each instance in which
the play didn't result in a score (“Four times when the left tackle made a
poor block on the opponents’ right tackle…. Once when the left halfback
hit the hole too wide”).
The results, compiled in a thick report that Collier submitted to Brown
late in the spring of 1947, was the most extensive performance analysis
done in the history of football to that date, and it gave the Browns a
secret window to their own offensive personality. Brown, suitably proud
of the report, referred to it as his “flaw-finder.”
And in the zero-sum world of football coaching, the flaw-finder and
the information it revealed was a key component in keeping the Browns
ahead of the crowd. During the 1947 and 1948 seasons, the team would
lose just one game, in the process winning two more league titles.
As in every other industry, the methods that were the most successful in
football were widely copied. “When everyone else had two assistants in
’46, he had six,” said Lou Spadia, the vice president of the 49ers. “And
so in ’47, everyone else had six. No one ever put their team up at a hotel
the night before a home game. Shit, he does it and now everyone else
has to do it.”
By 1948, Brown had become the most influential coach in America.
His annual coaching clinic in Cleveland was attended by more than
2,000 coaches, and his speeches to this group amounted to a football
manifesto.

“You must earn morale, you can't make it or develop it,” said Brown.
“Morale comes from the coach. You must be an all-out person. You have
to love the game, show interest in it, work hard at it. You have to feel it;
it has to come from the heart. Your wife should support you, and she
should be concerned about how much time you put in on it. I compare it
to the commitment that is made when a person decides to become a
priest. You have to be a football crackpot; there are no shortcuts.”
In the audience, a group of football crackpots looked on, assiduously
taking notes, spreading the Brown philosophy. Though the AAFC's future
was murky, the success of Paul Brown was guaranteed. He had recast
football in his image.
Brown's words at that first training camp—about wanting to be the
most amateur team in professional football—would be oft-quoted. What
he'd accomplished, though, was in some ways the opposite. With
precious few pep talks or appeals to emotion, he had taken a game
dominated by near-amateurs, and instilled it with a sophisticated,
professional air. Or as he himself would put it in a less guarded moment,
“We're getting the guesswork out of football. We're making a science out
of what is called a game.”

