SOURCE_ID: americas_game_chapter_05
SOURCE_TYPE: book
AUTHOR: Michael MacCambridge
SECTION: Chapter 5

5 Baltimore

"There has been a lot of talk in recent years to the effect that
professional football is a dying sport in this country,” wrote Sport
magazine in an unsigned editorial in the October 1952 issue. “Pro
football never has been able to sell itself completely to the fans who are
so wild over the collegiate version of the sport. Many people stubbornly
insist upon regarding football as a rahrah game which isn't the same
when you take away the rah-rah.”
The view that the pro game remained a marginalized sport, inferior to
its college counterpart, was still commonly held in the early ’50s, and
was somewhat understandable, in light of the upheaval the league
endured since the dissolution of the AAFC. Attendance was stagnant, still
unable to match the average crowds of 30,000 that had turned out in
1946 and 1947, and a franchise failed in each of the first three seasons
of the decade. It was the darkness before the dawn in the growth of pro
football. And when the league's itinerant orphan franchise finally found
a home in 1953 it was, oddly enough, right back where it started the
decade, in abject failure.
When the NFL and the AAFC announced their “merger” in December
1949, it was clear that the Browns and 49ers, the league's two most
successful teams, would be joining the NFL. But the identity of the third
team was less obvious. Only seven clubs had played in the AAFC's final
campaign, and because of the presence of NFL teams in New York,
Chicago, and Los Angeles, there was no chance that any of the AAFC
franchises in those cities would be chosen. That left either the Buffalo

Bills or the Baltimore Colts. Buffalo had the strongest support, and the
better team—having played for the AAFC title in 1948 and in a playoff
game in 1949. But NFL owners were leery about bringing in a city with
such severe winters; others felt it wasn't large enough to support pro
football.
So the selection was Baltimore, despite a 1-11 record and $90,000 in
losses in 1949, prompting the team's original owner, Bob Rodenburg, to
throw in the towel. Somehow, the dismal Colts still drew 23,000 fans per
game in 1949— nearly equaling the NFL's average attendance for that
season—at a time when attendance was down 30 percent throughout the
AAFC, due to Cleveland's dominance. Adding three teams created a
nightmare in scheduling with the thirteen-team league, since an odd
number of teams meant one club would be out of action each week.
Trucking magnate Abraham “Shorty” Watner, a man with a gift for
gab and euphemism (he once referred to the cemetery he owned as a
“series of underground bungalows”), stepped in to buy the Colts
franchise, vowing, “I will underwrite the team for two years, I will take
any losses and I will give all profits to worthwhile local charities.
Baltimore is in the big leagues to stay!”
But after another one-win season, in which the team averaged barely
15,000 per game, Watner turned the club over to the league and the
Colts were dissolved, their players drafted off among the remaining
twelve franchises. In response, the city of Baltimore filed suit against
Watner and the NFL.
A year later, after the New York Yanks stumbled to a 1-9-2 record in
the 1951 season, and owner Ted Collins (better known, and much more
profitable, as singer Kate Smith's manager) decided to give up his
franchise, Bell invited Baltimore representatives to the 1952 meetings.
But most NFL owners were unconvinced, after the dismal performance in
1950, that Baltimore would support football. Instead, the owners
uncharacteristically looked to a new market in the Southwest.
Into the picture, with stereotypical Texan pride, came Giles and
Connell Miller, sons of the founder of the Texas Textile Mills, and wouldbe entrepreneurs determined to turn the game on its head with a flow of
schemes that would match the state's grandiose reputation. The

franchise, granted in January 1952, would be called the Dallas Texans,
and the Miller brothers crowed about possible innovations: players
introduced to the Cotton Bowl crowd on horseback; a gun holster design
sewn onto the team's game pants; substitutes running on the field
carrying the Texas state flag, presenting it to the player being replaced,
who would then transport it back to the sideline.
None of those ideas were realized, nor were the wishful-thinking
rumors, published in the Dallas Morning News just days after the Texans’
purchase was announced, that the team was “going to trade the three
Negro players for one outstanding performer.” But how a still segregated
city would react to an integrated team was a hot topic; as difficult as it
was for the home team's black players and fans, it was worse for visitors,
as Dallas's Jim Crow laws maintained segregation in all the city's hotels.
To handle publicity for the new team, the Miller brothers recruited Te
x Maule to come to Dallas as the team's PR man, with a guarantee that
he could, as Schramm had in Los Angeles, work his way up to general
manager duties. (Back in Los Angeles, Maule's position as publicist had
been filled when Schramm hired Pete Rozelle, the Compton College
student who'd helped with the Rams’ first training camp in California in
1946.)
Shortly after arriving in Dallas, Maule found a wayward circus
masquerading as a football team. The coach was the vastly entertaining
but overmatched Jimmy Phelan, whose love of football was often
eclipsed by his love of horse racing (he called off one practice before a
game in Los Angeles to take the team to Del Mar). Practices were barely
organized recess periods for adults, with Phelan drilling his quarterbacks
and backs while the linemen mustered impromptu volleyball games
using the goalpost crossbar for a net. After his years with Reeves and
Schramm and the sophisticated Los Angeles system, Maule was horrified
to see a team run so shabbily.
The Texans’ season opened at home on September 28, 1952, against
the New York Giants, expected to be a sizable draw because of the
presence of SMU alums Kyle Rote and Fred Benners. But the game was
the third one in the Cotton Bowl in as many days—SMU faced Duke
Friday night, Texas A&M played Oklahoma A&M Saturday—and the pros
drew just 17,499 fans for their opener.

In the following weeks, as dire reports filtered back to the league
offices in Philadelphia, it quickly became apparent that pro football in
Texas was a fiasco. Typical of the underwhelming response that greeted
the pro game in Dallas was the decision by one paper, the Fort Worth
Press, to assign a twenty-year-old writer to the Texans’ beat. “I remember
the Texans vs. the 49ers, and Hugh McElhenny running wild in the rain,”
said Bud Shrake, who took breaks from his homework while attending
classes at TCU to cover the Texans. “And I remember looking down from
the press box—and could not see one single fan in the stands. Those few
who were in attendance had gathered under the overhang to get out of
the rain. Art Donovan and Gino Marchetti were joking in the locker
room that if the fans gave ’em any shit they could go into the stands and
whip the whole crowd.”
The Texans played what would turn out to be their final home game in
the Cotton Bowl November 9 against the Los Angeles Rams, in front of a
crowd generously listed as 10,000. Prior to the game, Tex Schramm
received a call from Bell in Philadelphia, ordering him, “Don't you leave
that office until you get your check.”
And so it ended quickly. The Dallas Citizens Council refused a bailout
loan of $250,000, and after Giles Miller placed an SOS to Bell—wiring
him on November 12 that the team could no longer operate—the league
took over the Texans. The players practiced for the last time in Dallas on
Thursday, November 13, after which they boarded a plane—bade
farewell by a weeping Giles Miller, who had lost $225,000 in less than a
season—and departed to Detroit, for a 43–13 loss to the Lions.
The team never returned to Dallas, but instead, with a chastened Bell
and the league assuming control of the franchise, was based for the rest
of the season in Hershey, Pennsylvania, the bucolic company town that
was the site of the Eagles’ training camp, an annual exhibition between
the Colts and Eagles, and a frequent stopover for West Coast teams on an
East Coast jaunt.
While trying to determine what to do with the Texans, Bell had
another problem on his hands, the pending suit from the city of
Baltimore, over the Colts’ short-lived one-year stay in the NFL. Sensing a
settlement was not imminent and hoping to solve two problems at once,
Bell announced December 3, 1952, that the city of Baltimore could

inherit the Texans’ franchise, provided they could sell 15,000 season
tickets in the next month. The city immediately swept into action,
holding all manner of dinners, drives, and auctions to raise the funds. It
was one of the early signs of a phenomenon that pro football would see
frequently in the coming decades: sports fans convinced that the very
existence of a franchise gave the city itself a measure of national prestige
and identity. By early January, the drive had sold 15,755 season tickets
and raised $300,000.
Though Baltimore had achieved its goal and had $300,000 in the
bank, it still didn't have an owner. Bell had been pestering his summer
neighbor in Margate City, New Jersey, the mercurial millionaire Carroll
Rosenbloom, to take the club. Rosenbloom began his career working in
his father's Marlboro Shirt Company, then made his own millions during
World War II with the Blue Ridge Manufacturing Co., which made denim
for military work uniforms. He had played on one of the Penn football
teams for which Bell was an assistant coach, and though he was fond of
his old mentor, he insisted that he was too busy with his other interests.
But Bell kept leaning on his old friend, insisting Rosenbloom was the
only man who could give the franchise the stability that the city
deserved. Bell finally settled the impasse with his usual mixture of
decisiveness and gruff charm. Calling Rosenbloom on the night of
January 11, Bell said, “Carroll, you're the new owner. I just announced
it.”
The sales terms were accommodating, requiring only $25,000 of the
$200,000 price tag up front, and the rest of the payments scheduled to
be paid, without interest, over the next eight years. Rosenbloom
relented, and agreed to assume 51 percent ownership of the franchise
(with four Baltimore businessmen taking the other 49 percent), provided
Bell could find him a general manager to handle the day-to-day affairs of
the club. Bell chose Don Kellett, the director of operations at WFIL-TV in
Philadelphia. Baltimore was back in the business of pro football.
Instead of the old silver-and-green, the Colts wore blue-and-white, as
had the Texans. In fact the capes the players wore on the sidelines were
the same as those worn in Dallas, with a Colts patch sewn onto the back,
covering the word “Texans.” The team got off to a 3-2 start, proving
again the wisdom of Bell's balanced scheduling philosophy, only to lose

its last seven games, being outscored 45–2 by Los Angeles and 45–14 by
San Francisco on the season-ending West Coast swing. Despite the poor
performance, attendance was good, as the Colts drew more than 30,000
fans per game.

At the end of the season, first-year coach Keith Molesworth was
reassigned to the scouting department and Rosenbloom ordered Kellett
to search carefully to find the best coaching candidate in the game. No
one within pro football was surprised when Kellett came back with the
name of Browns assistant coach Blanton Collier.
Paul Brown was in a sullen mood by the time New Year's Day 1954
rolled around. For the third season in a row, his Browns had lost the NFL
title game. After the 24–17 rematch loss to the Rams in 1951, the
Browns suffered bitter title game defeats to Buddy Parker and his Detroit
Lions, who beat Cleveland 17–7 in 1952 and prevailed 17–16 in 1953.
The Browns still had been to the title game in every season of their
existence, but with the rise of the hardhitting, hard-drinking Lions, pro
football had a different prototype for success, a throwback club that had
all the talent of the Browns, but none of their stuffy discipline. As an
answer to “Automatic Otto” Graham, the Lions came up with Bobby
Layne, the commandeering quarterback from Texas. “When Bobby said
block, you blocked,” said teammate Yale Lary. “When Bobby said drink,
you drank.”
Yet beneath the surface, the Lions’ system showed signs of Brown's
influence. When Parker took over in 1951, he followed Brown's lead of
shorter, less physical practices, as well as the custom of gathering the
team in a hotel the night before home games. Just like Brown, Parker
developed his playbook from Shaughnessy's system from the Bears in the
early ’40s, then simplified to the extreme.
It was the mind-set that Brown had brought to the game earlier—how
to do things more efficiently than opponents—that led Parker to
introduce the principles and pace that would come to be known as the
“two-minute offense,” a hurried-up, scaled-down set of plays in the
closing minutes of each half, designed to make maximum use of sideline
patterns to conserve the clock, signals at the line to avoid huddling after
each play, and judicious use of timeouts. “I had noticed how so many
teams let down the two minutes before the half, and the last two

minutes of a game,” said Parker.“It seemed you could get things done
then that you couldn't in the other 56 minutes of play. So we drilled on
it. Every day.”
In the title game rematch at Detroit, Cleveland led much of the way
despite Graham's worst day as a pro (he was 2-of-15 passing), but the
Lions got the ball on their own 20 with 4:10 to play, trailing 16–10, and
Layne drove them down the field for a 17–16 win.
Brown, still coping with the anguish of his third straight title game
setback, gave Colts GM Kellett an icy reception when Baltimore called
about Collier. As Carroll Rosenbloom would explain later, “Well, Paul
Brown didn't want Collier to leave and refused to give me permission to
talk to him. I went to see Bert about that and he assured me I had a
perfect right to do so, whether Brown wanted me to or not, as long as it
was a step up. So I talked to Blanton, who was scared to death of Paul
Brown and did not want to be a head coach at that time, which was
strange.”
After a conflicted Collier asked to have his name removed from
consideration for the job, Rosenbloom soon received advice from Browns
minority owner Davy Jones that another Browns assistant, Weeb
Ewbank, also would make a fine head coach. With Bell already having
clarified the policy of interviewing assistants, there was nothing Brown
could do to stop Ewbank from talking with the Colts, or leaving when
the job was offered a week later. When he was first contacted by
Baltimore, Ewbank knew nothing of the Colts’ recruitment of Collier, so
he asked Brown whether he could talk to the team. “If I don't let you,
you'll never forgive me,” said Brown.
Brown feared that if coaches fully versed in the Browns’ system took
his organizational techniques to other teams, Cleveland would lose much
of its edge. He was right to be fearful.
Ewbank began by doing things exactly the way the Browns did them.
In the spring of 1953, the Colts and Browns swung a fifteen-player deal,
and players like Don Shula and Bert Rechichar, who had played under
Brown in Cleveland, recognized in the Ewbank system in Baltimore the
same terminology, the same practice structure, the same attention to
detail, as they'd seen in Cleveland. While many had seen him as a foil for

some of Brown's occasional barbs, Ewbank was no rube, and possessed a
quiet confidence in his own coaching skills. Upon accepting the Colts
job, he predicted that within five years Baltimore would have a world
champion.

Art Donovan had heard that Ewbank had a reputation around the
league as “a tremendous coaching talent and a rat bastard.” He was
inclined to agree after his first meeting with Ewbank in Baltimore, when
the coach informed him he'd have to lose thirty pounds prior to training
camp. But Donovan was starved for winning, and he responded,
flourishing under the meticulous coaching of Ewbank.
As it happened, Collier wouldn't remain long with the Browns. Just
days later Paul “Bear” Bryant left the University of Kentucky to take over
the head coaching job at Texas A&M, and the school sought Collier. It
was the one job that the Kentuckian Collier would consider at the time,
and on February 11, 1954, after meeting with Brown at his winter home
in Fort Myers, and a sleepless night of consideration, Collier accepted
the job.
But he did so with a heavy heart, as a letter he wrote to Brown a few
days later made clear. “The personal depth of our relationship I cannot
discuss in a sane manner,” Collier wrote. “As always, I choke up like
some kid, so you will have to guess at the extent of my feelings. As to
the technical phase of our relationship, I want you and everyone else to
know that anything I have ever done in football is a result of the
opportunities you have given me.”
While Brown felt abandoned, all was not immediately lost. In the short
term, the aging Graham would carry the Browns back to the summit,
and the team routed Detroit, 56–10, in the 1954 championship contest,
as Graham threw three touchdown passes and ran for three more. The
Browns took a 35–10 halftime lead and never faltered. He walked off the
field, accepted the MVP award, and announced his retirement.
While the Browns—a model of consistency—were facing the prospect
of life without their leader Graham, the Rams were trying to figure out
why their talented club could be so frustratingly inconsistent. Much of
the tumult started at the top, where coach Joe Stydahar, so fatigued
after the 1951 championship that he was hospitalized for stress, grew

convinced that his longtime friend and key assistant Hamp Pool was
trying to undermine him. After losing 37–7 to the Browns in the 1952
season opener, Stydahar went to Reeves with an ultimatum, that either
he or Pool had to go. Reeves declined to fire Pool, so Sty-dahar quit, and
Pool—who was already drawing up game plans for both the offense and
the defense—became the new head coach of the defending champs. After
an 0-2 start, Pool settled the team and the Rams won eight straight,
before losing to Detroit in a playoff for the Western Conference title.
In 1953, they swept the Lions, but suffered two close losses to their
archrival, the San Francisco 49ers, costing them the division title. The
all-California games were becoming a major attraction, drawing a pro
record crowd of 77,648 in 1952, breaking that record with a crowd of
85,865 to the L.A. Coliseum in 1953, and breaking it again in 1954, as
93,553 watched the two teams tie, 24–24.
In those years, Schramm grew to admire the organizational vision of
Reeves, while at the same time loathing his weaknesses. There were
times when Reeves was brilliant, a keen, focused executive, at once wry
and reserved, able to pinpoint a problem and work doggedly until a
solution emerged. And then, inevitably, there would come a night when
Schramm would get a call from Reeves, phoning from Kiernan's or some
other nearby tavern, his voice lilting but slurred, asking casually if
Schramm might want to join him on the next plane to Ireland. “And he'd
be gone, just like that,” said Schramm. “Nobody would hear from him
for days on end. It was the most maddening damn thing.”
Schramm soon recognized that, whatever else his talents and defects
were, Reeves was a binge drinker with a dark soul and an unhappy
marriage. His drinking made an already stressful situation in Los Angeles
all the more volatile, and Schramm was convinced that his boss was
drunk when he ordered the firing of Pool after the 6-5-1 season of 1954.
Indeed, by the time of the Pool firing, Reeves was about to hire his
eighth coach in fifteen seasons. But the Pool firing wasn't without basis:
while undeniably a skilled tactician, Pool had lost the support of some of
the players and had a difficult, standoffish relationship with the growing
L.A. press corps (despite PR man Pete Rozelle's frequent entreaties to be
more accommodating to the writers).

After the firing, Reeves asked Schramm to begin a nationwide hunt for
the best coaching prospect he could find. Schramm called Bud Wilkinson
at Oklahoma, Red Blaik at Army, Red Sanders at UCLA, and heard one
name over and over again. “Everybody I spoke to talked about this guy
Sid Gillman at Cincinnati,” said Schramm.“There were rumors that the
only reason he hadn't gotten a bigger job offer was because he was
Jewish. Well, that wasn't a problem for us.”
There were plenty of rumors about the hyper-competitive, irascible
Gillman, and some of them were true. He really did spend hours on end
in the dark in his office, not just watching films but splicing them into
different thematic reels, looking at how players from different teams
executed the same moves or pass patterns. He actually had sent one of
his assistants, Jack Faulkner, out to the campus of the University of
Nevada in the summer of 1948 posing as a walk-on to earn a spot on the
team and collect information about Cincinnati's season-opening foe. And
though they would develop a civil relationship in later years, Paul
Brown was convinced that Gillman had once sneaked away from a
speech at one of Brown's clinics and pilfered a playbook from the team's
coaching office.
Gillman looked like the put-upon father of some ’50s-era situation
comedy. In his natty suits and trademark bow tie, pacing the sidelines,
chainsmoking, and barking behind his Wayfarer sunglasses, he emanated
a kind of flinty cosmopolitanism. Like so many others in the sport,
Gillman was a football obsessive. Unlike them, however, he seemed to
have countless other paths he might have chosen. The son of a movie
theater owner who grew up in Minneapolis, the gifted musician was
seemingly bound for law school, but before he left for college, he fell in
love with football, then played his last two years of college under Ohio
State's legendary Francis “Close the Gates of Mercy” Schmidt. Schmidt's
innovative offensive ideas awoke in Gillman a kind of consuming
intellectual curiosity, and Gillman stayed on after graduation to work as
Schmidt's assistant.
Preparing to embark on his honeymoon, he convinced his bride,
Esther, to go to Chicago to watch the College All-Stars practice instead,
and shortly thereafter, even as the couple was living as frugally as
possible, Gillman spent $15 to buy a used 35mm projector that would

allow him to watch game film. He also arranged to have his father,
uncle, and brother smuggle football film clips from the newsreels at the
Minneapolis theaters they managed. On the Sunday morning of the Pearl
Harbor attack, Sid Gillman was already in his office, watching game film
for the next season.

By 1954, he'd amassed a long list of rivals, as well as a 50-13-1 record.
Dan Reeves was impressed, and hired him.
Gillman took the use of film study to new areas, separating game films
into isolated reels for offense and defense, then cutting those further to
concentrate on specific plays and situations. With his background in
movie theater production, he understood not just how to operate a
projector but how to cut and splice film. Squirreled away in his office
with a film cutter and a handheld splicer, he'd cut a piece of film, stick a
piece of masking tape to it, scrawl a rushed label onto the tape, then
tape it onto any flat surface in his office. Gill-man's work with film
became so intense that the Rams eventually hired a fulltime assistant in
charge of film, a Southern California cinematographer named Mickey
Dukich, who brought an electric splicing machine that allowed Gillman
to work faster and in more organized form. Suddenly, he could quickly
assemble a reel of all the down-and-out routes that Tom Fears ran in a
previous season, or all of the Bears’ plays from a certain formation.
Instead of merely seeing a diagram of a play written by their coach on
the chalkboard, Gillman's players were now able to see themselves, and
others, repeatedly on film, using the repetition of visual evidence as the
first step to teaching. Watching the previous season's film of the Rams’
games, Gillman was amazed by the array of moves used by Tom Fears.
“We were just beginning to understand how ‘moves’ are made by a
receiver,” he'd explain later. “Fears was one of the greatest ‘move’ men
in the history of the game. He didn't have much speed, but he could turn
’em on their heads. We studied Fears and we began to coach what he
was doing.”
In his first season, 1955, Gillman's Rams were a charmed, inspired
squad. Though his offense was considerably less explosive than Pool's
1954 squad (scoring 54 fewer points, rushing for 307 fewer yards, and
passing for nearly 1,000 fewer yards than the previous season), Gillman's
team was sound and competitive. And with a late charge, they won the

Western Conference title. In a gleeful Rams locker room, Gillman
allowed himself a bit of a boast. “Where has this been all my life?” he
exclaimed. Schramm fixed him with a look and warned him, “Sid, it's
not always going to be this easy.”

And it wasn't. A week later in the NFL title game, the Browns rolled
over the Rams, 38–14. It was a perfect coda for Otto Graham, whom a
desperate Brown had coaxed out of retirement at the beginning of the
1955 season, after Cleveland lost to the College All-Stars at the start of a
1-5 exhibition season. After looking rusty in a season-opening loss to the
Redskins, Graham was brilliant the rest of the season, then masterful in
the title game victory. The win fulfilled a vow Graham had made to
Brown four years earlier when, walking off the field after Cleveland's
24–17 loss to the Rams in the 1951 title game, he told his coach, “I'll
make this up to you, Paul, I promise you that.” Graham retired for good
after the 1955 season; he had played ten seasons and led Cleveland to
ten championship games, winning all four in the AAFC and three out of
six in the NFL.
Brown knew that his team would no longer have a free ticket into the
title game, as it had in the past. A competitive shift had occurred in the
larger, post-AAFC version of the NFL, as Brown's organizational mastery
was now widely imitated. And as other teams began employing some of
the same principles, they also began seeking their own distinct
advantages—the Rams with their scouting system, the Lions with their
simplified schemes and two-minute offense—and the margin of error
afforded the Browns became smaller and smaller.
With Collier at Kentucky and Ewbank across the sidelines in
Baltimore, Brown's network of top-notch aides was diminishing. Though
they would be replenished with quality assistants, he would never again
in Cleveland assemble a staff in which he had the same level of
confidence and comfort.
Ewbank and Gillman arrived as head coaches at a time when the
modern, recognizable two-platoon form of professional football—at once
violent and cerebral, increasingly reliant on the passing game and the
dueling strategies of opposing coaches—began to reach critical mass.
The game as played in 1955 had changed substantially from what it had
been even five years earlier: faster, more wide-open, and played at a

higher level of specialization and expertise than ever before. Free
substitution became a permanent part of the rulebook in 1950, and by
the middle of the decade, the two-way player was becoming an
anachronism, and the onset of the distinctly modern American concept
of specialization was in full bloom. Players now confined themselves to
either offense or defense, and were afforded the luxury of focusing on a
particular discipline during practice; they also remained fresher
physically during the games, which were thus played at a higher
intensity level. The emphasis on speed by a few teams in the late ’40s
began to be felt throughout the league as well. But these developments
were obscured by the growing awareness of the game's often casual
brutality. “Never have the pros played better, more exciting football,”
wrote Melvin Durslag in Sports Illustrated in 1955. “Never have division
races been tighter nor games more unpredictable. Yet hanging like a pall
over the otherwise brilliant play are two nasty words: ‘dirty football.’ ”
Reports of growing violence, cheap shots, and “hatchet men” had been
building for some time before a sensationalistic Life cover story
—“Savagery on Sunday”—in the fall of 1955. By the time the jury found
Life guilty of libel—awarding Eagles Bucko Kilroy and Wayne Robinson
$11,500 each—the league's reputation had undergone a serious beating.
A year later, the Bears’ Ed Meadows executed a brutal late hit on Bobby
Layne, in the game that helped Chicago edge Detroit for the Western
Conference title. A few weeks later, Sports Illustrated began a Q&A with
Bert Bell following the 1956 season with the leading question, “Do you
believe that pro football is dirty and getting dirtier?”
Even as the discussion of the game's violence was at its shrillest, the
sport was becoming safer. The catalyst of one important change can be
traced to a Cleveland game against San Francisco in 1953. Late in the
second quarter, after scrambling for a first down, Otto Graham's face was
slashed on a savage late hit by the 49ers’ Art Michalik. It took fifteen
sutures inside Graham's mouth, administered without novocaine at
halftime, to close the wound. In the second half, while completing 9 of
10 passes to rally the Browns to victory, Graham wore an inch-thick
piece of clear plastic to protect his mouth. Later in the season, the
Riddell sports equipment company came up with a plastic shield that
wrapped around the helmet, but the shield grew brittle and often

cracked in cold weather. (Graham disliked it because he couldn't spit
under it.)
That led to another innovation from Paul Brown. At the end of the
season, he visited Riddell's offices in Chicago, and described to technical
consultant G. E. Morgan what he wanted: “Give me something that will
fit across the front of a helmet and will be about as big as my little
finger, with tensile strength. I want it so it can withstand a stray foot, or
a deliberately thrown fist or elbow, and take away the inclination to
punch someone. But keep it light enough to weigh less than an ounce.”
With that description to work on, Morgan and his team of engineers
invented the BT-5 (the BT stood for “bar tubular”), a single gray bar
composed of rubber and plastic that the Browns began wearing on their
helmets in 1954. While modified facemasks had been fashioned before,
this was the first one to be mass-produced. The faceguards caught on
quickly, and became common in the NFL within the next two years.
(Brown, incidentally, had a contract with Riddell that paid him a royalty
for every mask sold, bringing him millions in the decades ahead.)
The other significant change was written into the rules in 1955, and
while it seemed merely a minor modification at the time, it proved to
have a powerful civilizing influence. Instead of defining a tackle as both
bringing down a runner and stopping his forward progress, the new rule
stipulated: “If a player touches the ground with any part of his body,
except his hands or feet, while in the grasp of an opponent and
irrespective of the grasp being broken, the ball is declared dead
immediately.” The immediate result of the rule was that it stopped much
of the vicious close-in fighting that took place after tackles had been
made, as runners tried to struggle free and keep running. It also
curtailed the routine piling on that took place at the end of tackles, with
defenders continuing to jump on a runner long after he was downed.
“The pileup is where most players are injured,” said Greasy Neale in
1954. “It's intentional and can be avoided. That's vicious football.”
It would be a while before public perception caught up with the
reality of the changing nature of the game. The combination of safety,
speed, and unlimited substitutions, along with the influence of
Cleveland's relatively cerebral style and the Rams’ wide-open attack,
meant that the game would inevitably become more complex. And with

that, the role of coaches and personnel scouts would become more
important than ever.
In 1955, after Ewbank had spent a year at the helm in Baltimore,
having built up one of the most extensive networks of scouts in the
country, the Colts opened the draft by winning the “bonus choice,” a
lottery system by which all the teams in the league were guaranteed to
get the top pick in the draft once every twelve years. The draft itself was
becoming one of the most important dates on the NFL calendar, with
teams following the Rams’ lead and devoting more time and resources to
preparing for it.
The Colts’ investment in scouting was still financially modest, the
team paying a loose collection of college assistants $50, plus a sport shirt
from Rosenbloom's Marlboro Shirt Company, for their annual reports. In
that 1955 draft, the Colts used the first pick for All-American
quarterback George Shaw of Oregon. The team was still not well known
nationally, and when the time came for him to negotiate, Shaw had to
ask the Colts what their colors were.
At a time when rosters were at thirty-three and only three to five
rookies might be expected to make a team, the Colts’ first six selections,
and twelve rookies overall (including three free agents) made the 1955
squad. It seemed that they had found their starting quarterback, center,
and running backs for the next ten years. Alan “The Horse” Ameche,
from Wisconsin, quickly won the starting running back job, along with L.
G. “Long Gone” Dupre of Baylor. Dick Szymanski, a center from Notre
Dame, looked to anchor the line, and the quarterback, Shaw, who went
on to win Rookie of the Year honors in 1955, was deemed a can't-miss
prospect.
While teams like the Rams and Colts were taking a more systematic
approach to scouting, other clubs still lagged behind. It wasn't
uncommon, when the draft was held in Philadelphia in the late ’50s, for
teams’ scouts to show up with a few magazines and news clippings and
park out by the pay phones at the Warwick Hotel lobby. “Guys would
come in with rolls of quarters, because in those days you didn't have
credit cards to make telephone calls,” said Gil Brandt, who did scouting
work for the Rams at the time. “So they would have a pick coming up,
and they'd run out to the pay phone and drop two dollars and twenty-

five cents in—ding, ding, ding— and call Pappy Lewis of West Virginia.
‘Hey, Pappy, who is the best offensive lineman you played against last
year?’ And that's how this kind of stuff took place, as recently as the late
’50s.”

Typical of the mind-set at the time was that held by the Steelers, who
had the bonus pick for the 1956 draft. Head coach Walt Kiesling, a
longtime Steeler on his third tour of duty as coach, had received a
rousing recommendation from a fellow coach about a Colorado State
player named Gary Glick, projected to be a defensive back in the pros.
As the scouting continued, in meetings with Steelers owner Art
Rooney, and his sons Dan and Tim, Kiesling kept returning to the
recommendation. “Kiesling kept pulling this letter out,” remembered
Dan Rooney,“and he keeps saying, ‘We need a defensive back. This kid
would be terrific.’ It's a bonus pick! And we never send anybody out to
see him. We never did anything. Talked to him on the phone, the kid
was wonderful—you know, why wouldn't he be? I mean, he might have
been a good fifth-round pick, but to take him as the first guy in the
country …”
When the draft was held the weekend following Thanksgiving, and the
Steelers announced their selection—“Gary Glick, Colorado State”—the
veteran Pittsburgh Press newspaper writer Bob Drum marched over to the
Steelers’ table and said, “Harry Stick! Where the fuck did you get this
guy?”
In the aftermath of the draft, Dan Rooney called the school to get film
of the player, something that the Steelers’ coaching staff had neglected
to do. When it arrived a week later, Dan invited his father up to the
Steelers’ scouting office to watch the film with him. “But my father
wouldn't go. He said, ‘I'm busy.’ So we go off to the eighth floor, where
we've got our personnel office, and we put the film on. And it's like, the
smallest college that you could imagine, dogs running out on the field.
So we come back down into my dad's office, and nobody says anything.
And I remember my father saying, ‘He didn't look very good, right?’ ”
While the Steelers were still shooting blanks, many of the other clubs
were hitting a higher percentage. In the first round that same year, the
Colts selected fleet future All-Pro Lenny Moore, from Penn State, who

would go on to add a measure of explosiveness to an already strong
attack. The Browns’ scouting system continued to thrive as well, as
Cleveland added nine players who'd have NFL careers in 1955, and eight
more in 1956.

But with teams in such close quarters, with competition honed to a
sharper edge than before across the league, every single personnel
decision took on greater importance. And a seemingly minor one that
Brown had made a year earlier, in August of 1955, would come back to
haunt him.
From its earliest days, one of the credos of football was that
deprivation bred toughness. Coaches believed that boys with the most
difficult childhoods made the best football players. They were built of
tougher stuff, more willing to administer and accept pain, more willing
to sacrifice for the good of the whole, to find a familial bond in football.
John Unitas was one of the tough ones. He had been just five years old
when his father died of pneumonia in 1938, leaving him and his three
siblings to be raised by their mother, Helen, who took over the family's
coal delivery business in Pittsburgh, and got other work on the side,
from cleaning offices to accounting.
So Unitas quickly learned the value of work, earning a quarter at a
time by shoveling two tons of coal into his neighbors’ cellars.
Prematurely stoic, and undersized until a growth spurt in high school, he
was best known at an early age for being an excellent dribbler in
basketball and terribly shy away from the fields and courts. He could be
jovial, even a cutup, but it happened only with close friends and never in
a large social setting, where he maintained a kind of quiet, barely polite
detachment. On many a Friday night, Unitas would pick up his
sweetheart, Dorothy Hoelle, and take her and her friend to the
gymnasium for a school dance. He would drop them off, then wait in the
parking lot for a couple of hours; he didn't care for dancing, or crowds,
but he was determined that he would fulfill his obligations and escort his
girlfriend to the dance.
Unitas didn't see his first professional football game until September
1950, when his coach, Max Carey, brought him to the Browns-Eagles
game that opened the season in Philadelphia. At the time, he was a 5-

foot-10, 135-pound junior quarterback at St. Justin's. Under Carey, he
would blossom in his junior season, beating out senior Dan Rooney, then
attending the local power, St. Cecilia's, for All-City quarterback.
A year later, Unitas had grown an inch and gained ten pounds, and
was again an All-City performer. But there was little to indicate that he
was going to make it even as a college quarterback. He was dismissed as
too small during a tryout at Notre Dame (the Irish assistant sent Carey a
letter saying he thought Unitas would get hurt playing college football).
Indiana expressed, then lost, interest. He failed the entrance exam at
Pitt.
The lone school of consequence interested in Unitas was the University
of Louisville, where he earned a starter's job midway through his
freshman season and went on to lead a consistently undermanned team
through two winning seasons, before an academic scandal resulted in
fifteen players transferring from Louisville. With the decimated squad,
Louisville won just five games in Unitas's last two years, and the modest
buzz from pro scouts all but vanished. Still, Browns assistant Dick
Gallagher told Unitas he'd be drafted by Cleveland if he was available in
the later rounds. Instead, Pittsburgh took the hometown boy in the ninth
round of the 1955 draft.
That summer of 1955, Unitas reported to training camp for his
hometown Pittsburgh Steelers. It was a rude awakening. At the Steelers’
training camp in Olean, New York, he was overwhelmed by the
cliquishness of the veterans, who after a few days started calling him
Clem, after the country hayseed character Clem Kadiddlehopper created
by comic Red Skelton. The hazing he might have expected; the lack of
professionalism he didn't. When Unitas asked for the daily whites—
socks, T-shirt, shorts, and an athletic supporter that players wore under
their uniform in practice—the Steelers’ trainer told him to rummage for
them himself from what was lying in a large pile on the floor of the
locker room. After morning practices, a player had to hang his soaked
whites on a big hook by his locker, hoping the clothes would dry by the
afternoon session. When Unitas asked about getting his ankles taped
before practice, he was told that players didn't get taped unless they
were hurt.
Steelers head coach Walt Kiesling found little to like in Unitas,

particularly since competition was so intense on the thirty-three-man
roster, and with starter Jim Finks, versatile Te d Marchibroda (who also
handled the punting duties), and fellow rookie Vic Eaton, Kiesling paid
Unitas little mind. Through five exhibition games, Unitas never took a
snap.

Meanwhile, Art Rooney's sons were going crazy. “His accuracy was
incredible,” recalled Dan Rooney, who by then was overseeing the
training camp while his father spent the month of August at horse tracks.
“I'd watch him throw for hours and it made me sick to think Kies wasn't
giving him a look. My brother, Timmy—he was fifteen then—wrote my
father a letter telling him Unitas was not only the best passer in camp
but probably the best passer in football but the coaches weren't giving
him a fair shot. My dad wrote back from Aqueduct or someplace and
said, ‘Why don't you leave the coaching to the coaches?’ ”
Kiesling's mind was made up; he found Unitas thick and withdrawn,
too slow to grasp the Steelers’ playbook, that he set up too slowly in the
pocket, and couldn't find secondary receivers. On September 5, a full
three weeks before the beginning of the regular season, Unitas was cut.
When Kiesling called him into his office to tell him he was being
released, a bristling Unitas was defiant, openly challenging the decision.
“Y'know, it'd be different if I screwed up,” Unitas told him, “but you
never gave me an opportunity to play.”
“Unitas was totally ignored,” said Dan Rooney. “They never did
anything with him. It wasn't a question of misjudging him. They would
have had to judge him first. But they never did a thing with him.”
Unitas received bus fare back to Pittsburgh, but hitchhiked home
instead, where Dorothy (by now his wife) was waiting with news that
she'd bought tickets for their families to see the Steelers’ opening home
game the following week. That evening, they sat around in their living
room, neither speaking, neither quite sure what to do next.
Within a day, his old high school coach, Max Carey, would provide
consolation and direction. The Browns, without the retired Otto Graham,
had lost to the College All-Stars, and were clearly desperate for
quarterbacking help. Carey persuaded Unitas to send Paul Brown a
telegram, asking for a tryout in Cleveland. (Unbeknownst to Unitas, Art

Rooney had called Brown at the behest of his son. “Dan says this Unitas
is a good lookin’ kid,” he said. “Maybe you guys should pick him up.”)
By that time, though, Brown had already made his move, coaxing Otto
Graham back for one more season. Brown wired Unitas back, telling him
that since Graham was returning for one final season, the Browns
wouldn't need any help at quarterback that year, but if he wanted to,
Unitas was welcome to come to training camp with the Browns the
following July.
With that shred of hope, Unitas kept his dreams alive. He spent the
next few months working construction in Pittsburgh, spending six days a
week as the “monkey man” atop a pile driver, part of a road construction
crew laying the foundation for a mill in Aliquippa. On Thursday nights
he'd drive to the rock-strewn dirt field next to Arsenal Street School, and
play with the Bloom-field Rams, a semipro team that played once a week
in the Steel Bowl Conference, an array of Industrial Belt semipro clubs.
At $6 per game, Unitas was playing football. Paid in cash by team owner
Chuck Rogers in the basement of Parise's Dairy, just across the street
from the field, Unitas brought his $6 home to his wife, telling her,
“Dotty, don't spend this on bills. Spend it on something nice for
yourself.”
By the end of Weeb Ewbank's second season with the Colts in 1955,
only twelve players remained from Keith Molesworth's Colts squad of
1953. Baltimore's team was younger, bigger, faster, more talented, and,
with a 5-6-1 record, starting to show signs of coming together. During
that fall of 1955, Ewbank received a postcard from Pittsburgh, unsigned
but addressed to him, which read, “There's a boy in sandlot ball here,
playing for the Bloomfield Rams, who's worth looking at. His name's
John Unitas.” He later mentioned Unitas to Colts GM Don Kellett, who
also had him on a list of possible free agents. One of the few places the
team felt secure was at quarterback, with bonus pick George Shaw
coming off his impressive Rookie of the Year season in 1955. But when
backup quarterback Gary Kerkorian told Kellett that he was planning to
retire so he could attend law school, the GM began combing the free
agent lists, and came across the name of Unitas, whom Ewbank had
mentioned earlier.
In February 1956, Kellett called Unitas. What would go down in

legend as an 80-cent phone call was actually two 84-cent long-distance
calls, one in the afternoon, when Dorothy Unitas told Kellett her
husband wasn't home from work yet, and another later in the evening,
when Unitas answered the phone. Kellett invited him to come work out
for Ewbank the following week, with the understanding if he passed
muster then, he'd be invited to training camp, and offered a $7,000
contract if he made the team.
While some teams, most notably the Rams, had started using movie
cameras as a technical aid during practices, the Colts didn't have such
equipment. When Unitas and some other free agents came for their
workout, they played on an unmarked field next to the Clifton Park pool
in Baltimore, and an assistant snapped still photos of all the players, to
study for later evaluation.
“We took pictures of John under center, and again when he set up and
right at the last when he followed through,” recalled Ewbank. “That was
the thing we noticed right away, the way he followed through. It was
exceptional. The pictures showed it clearly. His arm went through so far
that he turned his hand over like a pitcher…. When he followed through
his fingers turned over and you could see the back of his hand.”
Ewbank told Unitas to work on keeping the nose of the football up on
short passes, to get more loft on his long passes, and to be in camp in
July. Unitas could have held out and gone to the Browns’ camp, but the
Colts were more aggressive, and Cleveland hadn't been in touch since
Brown's short note the previous August. With only one proven
quarterback in Baltimore, Unitas sensed his chances for success were
better there. Thus would the relative fortunes of the Cleveland Browns
and Baltimore Colts be forever changed.
From the first day of Colts training camp, that July 1956 in
Westminster, Maryland, Unitas realized that he'd found a home. He felt
welcomed by the Colts, comfortable in an environment that was much
more nurturing for players. Dick Nyers, a rookie kick returner, met him
at the airport and drove him to the Colts’ offices, where they got a ride
to training camp. In the locker room, the whites were rolled up and
waiting by each player's locker. When the veterans arrived days later,
Unitas found a completely different atmosphere. “These guys would take
you aside and try to work with you and help you,” he said. “George

Shaw was happy to help me with anything I asked of him. You could see
Gino Marchetti taking a defensive end and showing how to work. Yo u
never got any of that kind of treatment in Pittsburgh.” Unitas still didn't
cut a very convincing figure on the football field. The Giants had first
faced him in that 1956 preseason, and Unitas appeared so ungainly
trotting out onto the field that day that Giants quarterback Charlie
Conerly looked over to Frank Gifford on the New York sideline and said,
“Look at that goofy sonofabitch.”
But as would be said about him hundreds of times after then, they
noticed that Unitas got the job done. The first glimmer came in the
team's annual blue-white intrasquad scrimmage in Hershey,
Pennsylvania. Shaw had been out with the flu, and Unitas started for the
white-jersey second squad, passing for three touchdowns. Late in the
game, the staff asked him to switch to a blue jersey, to try to rally the
team, which he did, as the game ended 20–20. On the closing drive, he
made his first pass to the Colts’ second-year end Raymond Berry.
The two men came from vastly different backgrounds—Berry's father
had been a coach at the Paris, Texas, high school—but they shared a
relentless desire to master the game. With Unitas, there was the endless
perfection of the technique that Ewbank constructed on his carefully
annotated four-page sheets of quarterback's instructions. Concerned
about his tendency to throw the ball too low, Ewbank during one
training camp took to stringing a volleyball net up across the scrimmage
line, and having Unitas throw his arsenal of passes over it.
But it was not all instruction. Unitas possessed qualities that were
unteach-able and inimitable. Teammates and opponents alike soon
noticed his absolute fearlessness in the face of a pass rush, his
willingness to hold on to the football before releasing a pass until the
last possible instant, and to do so without flinching. He also had a habit,
on deeper routes, of deceiving defenders by rolling his shoulders as if
winding up for a pass, away from the side of the field he intended to
throw to, then rolling them back toward his chosen receiver. More
deceptive than the standard pump-fake, the move impressed Ew-bank
enough for him to try to teach it to the other quarterbacks. But it
required a dexterous, loose-jointed coordination, and no one else on the
team could master it.

If Unitas was a diamond in the rough, Berry was a self-polished stone.
Decades before it became common in pro sports, he'd developed his own
elaborate set of habits and methods, which set him apart from anyone on
the team. “He went to bed at half past eight, to make sure he got enough
sleep,” remembered Unitas, “and when he got a pair of uniform pants
that fit just the way they should, he insisted on hand-washing them
himself, so they wouldn't be given out to some other player after laundry
was done. He carried a football with him every place he walked the
camp grounds, so he would get the feel of the ball and keep his fingers
supple enough to catch any passes that might be thrown to him.” Berry
would develop, both on his own and later in 1958 with the help of
receivers coach Bob Shaw, an arsenal of eighty-eight distinct maneuvers
designed to elude defenders. And in training camp and throughout the
season in practices, as the shadows grew longer and the light grew
dimmer, Unitas and Berry could be found out on the field for thirty
minutes or more after all of their teammates had gone inside.
The Colts were 1-2 when they traveled to Chicago on Sunday, October
21, to face the Bears in Wrigley Field. Leading the game 20–7, Colts
quarterback George Shaw was injured, tearing ligaments being tackled
by Chicago defensive tackle Fred Williams. Unitas came in and the first
ball he handed off was a fumbled exchange, leading to a touchdown. His
first pass was intercepted by the Bears’ J. C. Caroline, and returned for a
touchdown. The Bears ran away with the game, 58–27. But the next
week, Unitas led the club to a 28–21 win over the Packers, and there
was evidence to suggest that the team was rallying around him.
Ewbank would remember Unitas taking control almost instantly, and
having both the will and the presence to be able to stridently criticize his
teammates if they weren't performing. “Goddammit, this is no fun back
here,” Unitas would say. “You should try throwing that ball, the way
you're letting them through.”
On November 11, 1956, Unitas led the Colts into Cleveland, where
Baltimore won, 21–7, in a homecoming of sorts for Ewbank. It was the
Colts’ first win over Cleveland in seven games, dating back to the AAFC.
When an elated Ewbank trotted across the field to shake hands with his
old mentor, Brown wasn't there.
Later that week, back in Baltimore, equipment manager Fred

Schubach wondered aloud when George Shaw would return from his
injury. The big defensive end Gino Marchetti fixed Schubach with a look,
and said, “He's never going to be the quarterback again. Unitas is the
quarterback.”
