SOURCE_ID: americas_game_chapter_03
SOURCE_TYPE: book
AUTHOR: Michael MacCambridge
SECTION: Chapter 3

3 “Let Bert Do It”

In their time of crisis, confronted with the specter of Arch Ward, Paul
Brown, and an AAFC bankrolled by multimillionaires, the NFL owners
had selected as their new commissioner a cash-poor blueblood who had
been, arguably, the worst head coach in league history, mustering just
10 wins in five-plus seasons.
But what the owners were looking for in 1946 wasn't a celebrity
figurehead or a polished boardroom presence or a proven winner with
an aura of genius. They instead sought a fighter, someone who didn't
need to be sold on the virtues of their sport, or briefed on the intricacies
of its problems. And in the indefatigable presence of Bert Bell, they
found their beacon of hope, a man whose unquenchable love for football
was so close to blind adoration as to make no difference. “His mission in
life was football,” said George Halas. “He had a sure instinct for
conducting the business of the game.”
Bell still bore vestiges of his old self, the playboy raconteur of the ’20s
with slicked-back hair, by now silver, and an estimable paunch, neatly
draped in blue serge suits during the fall and winter, and tan gabardine
in the summer. His voice was a thing of wonder, a deep, growling
baritone that projected through office walls and over static-filled phone
lines. He was a voluble man of motion, generally heard before seen. And
he was what pro football needed most at the time: a true believer.
His hiring came at a critical moment, and not only because of the
challenge of the AAFC. The league was in danger of imploding, beset by
factional rivalries and legislative paralysis, a result of ten strong-willed

men, each with definite ideas about why their beloved sport was losing
so much money.
Even worse than the yelling and arguing were the intractable, souldeadening stalemates, when long stretches of time went by in which
nothing was said, when the only sound in the room was two or more
men fuming. While numerous gatherings deteriorated to these standoffs,
the league's annual meetings were particularly brutal because they
involved the perennial exercise in argumentation, the drawing up of the
coming season's schedule.
The schedule itself—the selection of opponents and the sequence of
games—was a crucial element in each team's home game ticket sales,
which in turn were the single most important revenue source for each
club. So from the earliest days of the league, owners devoted days and
days to obdurate, petulant haggling over the competing claims on the
coming season's schedule.
With the ten-team league separated into two divisions in 1933, the
only definitive rules were those that stipulated that every team should
play a home-and-home series against every other team within its
division. But that would account for just eight of each team's twelve
games. Beyond that, every owner wanted his own advantage; every team
in the East wanted the Bears to visit; every team in the West wanted the
Redskins to visit. And each team wanted to go on the road to play teams
that drew well, because visiting teams got a 40 percent share of the gate,
after allowing for stadium rental.
This issue was, in a real sense, why a league office was needed in the
first place: an impartial arbiter to determine qualifications, league
games, rules, procedures, and, when possible, to help generate publicity
on behalf of the entire enterprise. In theory, it was the league's job to
mediate these disputes and find equitable solutions to problems such as
the schedule. In reality, Layden and Joe Carr before him had found this
difficult, if not impossible, to do.
“The owners who had the staying power were the ones who came
away with the decent schedules,” said Art Rooney. “The guys who snuck
out to get some sleep or go night-clubbing wound up getting murdered
the next season because when they weren't there to defend themselves,

we'd give them all the dates we didn't want.” Even those who stuck
around to fight often felt victimized by cronyism and the perception that
the oldest franchises looked out for themselves to the exclusion of
others.

So owners learned to dread the annual meetings, and the battles that
would invariably follow. Minutes from meetings in the ’40s often
included the shorthand euphemism, “There was a general and lengthy
discussion on the problems of the game schedule.” Entire sessions might
consist of this notation alone. Or, from the 1948 meeting, a notation that
beginning with the evening of January 15,“discussion on the schedule
took place from 3:50 to 7 PM, 8 PM to 2 AM, 10:45 AM to 1:45 PM and
2:55 to 6 PM.”On one occasion, after three days of debate resulted in a
schedule finally being placed in its entirety on a chalkboard, the
Redskins’ George Preston Marshall—angry that he hadn't gotten either of
the swing home games he coveted—walked up to the chalkboard and
quickly erased the entire chart, eliciting curses and howls, since no one
at the meeting had yet committed the schedule to paper.
It was hoped that the well-liked Bell could bring some equanimity to
the proceedings, but both the 1946 and 1947 meetings deteriorated into
the usual protracted discussions, in which nothing was settled.
Wellington Mara, son of Giants owner Tim Mara, was just then getting
his first taste of league meetings. “The schedules would always take
several days and Bert always found time to be politic,” said Mara. “All
the clubs were very jealous of the schedules and no one trusted anyone.
After a while, people started walking out of the league meetings and
saying, ‘Let Bert do it.’ ”
And for the next dozen seasons, Bell did.
Though he endeavored to meet each team's specific needs, his
scheduling was guided by an overall philosophy. “Weak teams should
play other weak teams while the strong teams are playing other strong
teams early in the year,” he once explained. “It's the only way to keep
more teams in contention longer into the season.” That his intent was to
help teams at the box office was undeniable. But the function of Bell's
machinations was to make the league more competitive, and to keep
more teams in the race longer into the season.

Each off-season, Bell would devote himself to this task, often to the
exclusion of all others, and spend hundreds of hours fashioning dozens
of different prospective schedules, while juggling the various
commitments, requests, blackout dates, and other variables. Sitting at his
dining room table, he worked with a huge cardboard placard, laid out in
a grid fashion, with team names running along the top and game dates
running down the side. Next to the board would be dozens of dominoes,
borrowed from his sons, Bert Jr. and Upton, each with a team name
Scotch-taped on the back, along with several books of paper matches.
When Bell wanted Philadelphia to play at Washington on a certain date,
he'd find the date on the left-hand side of the board, and on that line
he'd place a domino with Philadelphia's name on it into the two-inchsquare box below Washington's heading. On the same line, he'd then
place a match into the box under Philadelphia's heading, to indicate the
Eagles had been assigned a road game that week.
For weeks on end, Bell would fill out numerous schedules in this
fashion, drinking coffee and sipping grape juice, breaking only for dinner
at seven and, later on, his nightly constitutional to Davis’ Drugstore a
few blocks away in downtown Narberth, the Philadelphia suburb where
he lived. Armed with a small container of chocolate ice cream, he would
return to his schedules and work late into the night, taking phone calls
with a long extension cord, copying off possible schedules on smaller
pieces of cardboard when he was finished. He would then weigh each
against the others, noting minor adjustments among the countless
different combinations, before presenting one or more to the assembled
owners.
There were other factors besides the schedule that contributed to the
change, but Bell's intention of keeping the league more balanced was
soon realized. From 1937 to 1946, the Packers and Bears from the
Western Division and the Giants and Redskins from the Eastern took
nineteen of the twenty spots in the NFL championship game. Beginning
with 1947, that would change, with even longtime doormats like the
Eagles and Cardinals rising to the top. As caretaker of and ambassador
for the game, Bell quickly developed a mind-set in which the league was
only as healthy as its weakest team. His son Upton would recall him
returning home after Sunday games and proudly calling upstairs to his

wife, Frances, “Mother, guess what? It's week four, and they're all still in
the race.”
Those in Bell's social circle had expected different, grander things. He
was the squire of a Philadelphia Main Line family whose father, John
Cromwell Bell, was among the most prominent lawyers in the
Philadelphia area, and the Pennsylvania state attorney general from
1911 to 1915. The elder Bell, who played football at Penn in the 1880s,
was chairman of the school's athletic council, was second in seniority to
Walter Camp on college football's seminal Football Rules Committee,
whose reforms saved the sport in 1906.
De Benneville Bell was born February 25, 1895; because there were
many “De Benneville Bertrams” in his lineage, he was known as “Bert”
from an early age. “If you don't think I had to fight to get people to call
me ‘Bert,’ ” he told one reporter, “then I must have dreamed all those
schoolyard battles.” He grew up muscular and affable, and by all
accounts unspoiled by this luxurious upbringing. Bert starred in football,
baseball, and basketball at the Haverford School outside of Philadelphia,
but when speculation rose about him going to one of the emerging
football powers outside the state, his father immediately and publicly
quashed it. “He'll go to Penn,” John C. Bell told a newspaper reporter,
“or he'll go to hell.” Bell indeed went to Penn in 1914, majoring in
English and playing football for three years as quarterback. In 1916,
Penn went 7-2-1 and accepted a bid to the Rose Bowl. Bell started at
quarterback in the game, January 1, 1917, where unbeaten Oregon
prevailed, 14–0. After a two-year stint with an army medical unit in
France, he returned to captain Penn's football team in 1919, graduated
in 1920, and returned that fall as an assistant for Penn head coach John
Heisman, where he remained on staff through 1928.
Though he worked nominally as a stockbroker during the ’20s, Bell
spent the decade living a life not unlike the romanticized cinematic
visions of the ’20s, frequenting nightclubs, dancehalls, and speakeasies,
tooling around town in a cherry-red Marmon roadster and a coonskin
coat, playing with equal vigor the stock market, the gambling halls, and
the horses, devoting the month of August to the summer season at
Saratoga. On summer Saturdays in Chelsea, when his father would leave
for Philadelphia to attend church services the following morning, Bert

Bell would often throw a party, hosting his eclectic assemblage of friends
—ranging from entertainers like Bob Hope and Cesar Romero to bluecollar acquaintances from the resort town.
After a series of financial setbacks, Bell was working for his father,
managing the Ritz-Carlton Hotel on Broad Street. It was there he met the
musical comedy actress and former Ziegfeld dancer Frances Upton, a
sweet, vivacious dazzler with a dramatic streak and a staunch moral
fiber, a perfectly complicated Catholic beauty of the modern age.
Between starring roles in such Broadway hits as Whoopee!, with Eddie
Cantor, Frances Upton often performed sets at the Ritz's small, swanky
rooftop lounge. Doting on Frances, the smitten Bell would wait until she
finished her performance, then escort her to a nearby Catholic church
where a mass was held at two in the morning for late-shift printers and
newspaper workers. While the daily communicant Frances went inside,
Bert remained outside on the street, reading the paper, joshing with the
police officers, and watching the nightlife. One summer night when Bert
professed his undying love to Frances, she told him she could never
marry a drinking man. Surrounded by friends, he ordered one last drink
and downed it, then vowed to her he would never touch alcohol again.
By all accounts, he didn't; they were married January 4, 1934.
The previous summer, Bell had borrowed $2,500 from his fiancée and,
along with his former Penn teammate Lud Wray, headed a syndicate that
bought the NFL's defunct Frankford Yellow Jackets franchise, a pro
power in the ’20s that had gone bankrupt during the 1931 season.
Renaming the team the Eagles, after the eagle logo on the National
Recovery Administration's em blem (“We Do Our Part”), Bell and Wray
took over the club and rejoined the NFL for the 1933 season.
It was clear from the day he bought the Eagles that Bert Bell had
found his calling, and in the coming years he would serve as owner,
coach, trainer, general manager, ticket-taker, and janitor. Walking along
the Jersey shore during their honeymoon, Frances looked up to the clear
night sky and said to Bert, “Gee, look at the moon.” He gazed up at the
night sky and smiled. “Frances,” he said, “I only wish I had a punter who
could kick that high.”
The Eagles were not immediately embraced by the city. Even though
his playing costs were modest—Bell paid some players as little as $15

per game— stadium rentals were steep, the team drew poorly, and the
losses were alarming. Over their first three seasons, the Eagles lost more
than $80,000 and the partnership went bankrupt after the 1935 season.
When the team was put up for auction in 1936, Bell was the only bidder,
buying out his partners for $4,500, and installing himself to replace
Wray as head coach. By that time, Bell had already made a lasting
contribution to pro football.
After two seasons with the Eagles, it had become apparent to Bell that
the league was becoming dangerously stratified. The three perennial
contenders— the Bears, Packers, and Giants—were the only clubs that
flirted with profitability, while the remainder of clubs were rarely in
contention and suffered heavy losses. The best players coming out of
college were, naturally, more inclined to sign with teams where their
earning power and chances of success were high.
Bell had been particularly discouraged by his fruitless efforts to sign
Stan “King Kong” Kostka, a brawny fullback who'd transferred from
Oregon to Minnesota in time to play for the Gophers’ first national
championship team in 1934. After contacting Kostka by phone, Bell took
a train from Philadelphia to Minneapolis, and they met in the lobby of a
hotel. Kostka said the best offer he'd received from another team was
$3,500, and Bell offered $4,000. Hedging, Kostka said he wanted an
hour to consider it. When they met later, Kostka was still noncommittal.
After Bell increased his offer to $6,000, Kostka still balked, and after
further flirtations later signed with the NFL's Brooklyn Dodgers. Bell
returned to Philadelphia discouraged, and convinced the whole system
needed to be fixed. “I made up my mind that this league would never
survive unless we had some system whereby each team had an even
chance to bid for talent against the other,” said Bell.
His reasoning led to the radical proposal he floated the following
spring, during the league meetings of 1935. “Gentlemen, I've always had
the theory that pro football is like a chain,” he told his fellow owners.
“The league is no stronger than its weakest link—and I've been a weak
link for so long that I should know. Every year the rich get richer and
the poor get poorer.” Bell suggested that the dominance of the Giants,
Bears, and Packers meant that the league's other teams were at a
functional disadvantage in recruiting new players. “Here's what I

propose,” he said. “At the end of each football season, I suggest that we
pool the names of all eligible college seniors. Then we make our
selections in inverse order of the standings—that is, the lowest-ranked
team picks first. We do this round after round until we have exhausted
the supply of college players.”

There's no record that Bell used the word “draft” in this proposal, but
when the motion was approved, reporters quickly called a spade a spade,
and the NFL draft was born. The Bears and Giants, who had played in
both of the league's first two scheduled title games in 1933 and 1934,
had the most to lose from such an arrangement. But both Halas and Tim
Mara went along with it. “People come to see a competition,” Mara
explained. “We could give them a competition only if the teams had
some sort of equality, if the teams went up and down with the fortunes
of life. Of course, that meant that no team would in the future win a
championship every third year and people would start saying, ‘What's
happened to the Giants? They aren't the team they used to be.’ That was
a hazard we had to accept for the benefit of the league, of professional
football and everyone in it.”
The Eagles went 2-9 in 1935, earning Bell and the Eagles the dubious
right to select first in the league's first “annual selection meeting,” held
February 8, 1936, at the Ritz-Carlton in Philadelphia. Bell selected
Chicago halfback Jay Berwanger, winner of the inaugural DAC Trophy,
presented by the Downtown Athletic Club of New York City to the best
player east of the Mississippi. (A year later, after the death of Bell's
former coach, DAC director John Heisman, the trophy was renamed the
Heisman Trophy, and players across the country became eligible.) But
Berwanger chose not to turn pro and, in fact, the Eagles were unable to
sign any of their nine selections in that first draft.
Though it would take at least a decade before scouting systems
became sophisticated enough to have any success at reliably identifying
pro prospects, Bell's concept was a crucial element in equalizing talent
and competition throughout the league. He was not to profit, however,
from his own innovation. Starting with his first season as sole owner and
head coach in 1936, Bell's Eagles finished fifth, fifth, fourth, fourth, and
fifth in the five-team Eastern Division.

In the face of these persistent failures, his enthusiasm never wavered.
He'd beat the streets, often buttonholing fellow members outside
Philadelphia's Racquet Club, or leaving a packet of tickets behind the bar
at Lew Tendler's Saloon, close to the Ritz. He'd even been known to
stand on an island in the middle of rush-hour traffic on Broad Street to
hawk tickets at passing cars. But the losses mounted, and by the end of
the 1940 season Bell was in another financial crisis. “Bert was a guy that
just squandered his money,” said one family friend. “I mean he was a
good person and he wasn't out drinking or doing any of that kind of
stuff. But he just didn't have control of his money.”
The Steelers’ Art Rooney would bail him out of his crisis, through a
complex series of procedures. First Rooney sold the Steelers to New York
millionaire Alexis Thompson, then put up a stake to buy a half-interest
in the Eagles. Then, Rooney and Bell swapped franchises with
Thompson, along with the players themselves. Historian Bob Carroll,
founder of the Professional Football Researchers Association,
summarized it thusly: “Bert and Art brought the Eagles to Pittsburgh and
renamed them the ‘Steelers.’ Meanwhile, Thompson took the Steelers to
Philadelphia and renamed them ‘Eagles.’ Most of the former Philadelphia
players wound up in Pittsburgh and [vice versa]. As late as 1945 the
Steelers were officially owned by the Philadelphia Football Club, Inc….
Just about everybody ignores the technically correct descent, and it's
probably best that they do. I mean, how convoluted do you want your
pro football history to be?”
Asked about the deal years later, Art Rooney could only throw up his
hands. “Things were different then,” he said. “Money was tough to come
by.”
So in 1941, Bell and Rooney were running the Steelers, with Rooney
serving as general manager and Bell coaching yet again. A picture from
the period shows Bell, proudly standing on the field, in a fedora and Tshirt, “Pittsburgh Steelers Football Club” neatly stenciled across the
chest, whistle around his neck, two-tone buckskin shoes peeking out
beneath khaki slacks. After beginning the 1941 season with an 0-2
record, a morose Bell returned to Pittsburgh and suggested to Rooney
that the team make some deals.
“People in Pittsburgh are tired of our deals,” said Rooney, chomping

his ever-present cigar. “They always backfire.”
“What do you think we should do?” asked Bell.
“Bert,” said Rooney, “did you ever think about changing coaches?”
Bell heeded his friend's advice and retired from coaching for good,
moving to the Steelers’ front office, where he and Rooney would soldier
on through World War II. Combined with his ignominious five years in
Philadelphia, Bell compiled a 10-46-2 record in the NFL. His. 190
winning percentage is the worst in NFL history among coaches with five
seasons or more experience.
When the war ended and the time came to replace Layden, Bell was
the insider who was quickly chosen. “Those guys—Halas, Marshall, Bell,
Rooney, Mara, Bidwill—those six pretty much were the guys that ran the
show,” said Dan Rooney, who grew up watching his father's enduring
friendship with Bell. “And so when they were ready to make a change,
they just came to the conclusion that Bert could do it. Bert could go back
to Philadelphia and run the league. And it was an obvious choice from
the standpoint of what they wanted to do: make one of their own, who
could become available, the commissioner. I mean, you know, Halas
couldn't become available, Marshall couldn't become available. Bert was
one who could.”
“Pro football has growing pains,” wrote John Lardner in Newsweek in
1945. “The end of the war may be the event which will build the sport
into national proportions both geographically and commercially, just as
the end of the last war gave pro players their original impetus and made
them begin to think of organization and respectability.” In this, Lardner
proved prophetic. The country was mobilizing for a series of broad social
changes each of which, in its own way, would benefit pro football.
More than 16 million Americans had joined the armed forces during
World War II, and 12 million of them—about two thirds of all American
men between the ages of eighteen and thirty-four—were still in uniform
when the war concluded in August of 1945. Within a year, nine million
of them had moved to civilian life. Many would take part in the GI Bill
of Rights, signed in 1944, which in addition to providing aid for housing
and business start-ups, provided returning vets with monthly stipends to
cover educational expenses. When the program ended in 1945, nearly

two million had gone to college with GI Bill assistance. Almost 500,000
Americans graduated from colleges in 1950, compared to 216,500 in
1940. That sweeping change affected campus life and campus athletics,
and it surely affected the quality and quantity of football players eligible
for the NFL's draft.
Salaries increased sharply in pro football and, for the first time, there
was something of a decent living to be made. Even pedestrian players
returning from the war in 1945 made more than the annual per capita
disposable income in current dollars of $1,074.
Television research, which had been virtually suspended with the
beginning of American involvement in World War II, was again a toppriority issue for businesses, and sales in the U.S. would increase
exponentially in the years ahead. The effects of the baby boom would
solidify the growth of spectator sports in the ’60s and ’70s, but even in
the late ’40s, it was clear that Americans were going to have more free
time and more spending money. By the end of the decade, the U.S.
accounted for 7 percent of the world's population and 42 percent of its
income.
With this postwar prosperity as a backdrop, and a nation embracing its
pastimes in a return to normal, the NFL's and AAFC's “war between the
leagues” was a big story. From the moment he assumed office, Bell was
prepared to fight. And he did so initially by refusing to discuss the
challengers. Upon taking the job in January 1946, he said, “Sure I
recognize there's a rival professional league in operation, trying to take
our players and buck us at the gate. But I expect to be so busy with the
affairs of the National League that I will have no time to think about the
other circuit.” He moved the league offices from Chicago, where Layden
was based, to New York and, after wearying of the daily commute, in
1948 to Philadelphia, first to a spot near the University of Pennsylvania
campus, then to Center City Philadelphia, in an office building at 1518
Walnut Street.
The challenge of the AAFC was as formidable as expected. Arch Ward's
league was an unusual upstart, because it brought so many advantages
that rival leagues in the past hadn't enjoyed: by the end of 1946, Paul

Brown was probably the best-known pro football coach in America and
his organization was justly celebrated; Ward's role in the formation of
the league and his influence throughout the country meant that the new
league would have little trouble getting press.

The AAFC possessed a roster of owners who were much wealthier than
their NFL counterparts. The new league had real estate magnates like
Mickey McBride, Anthony J. Morabito in San Francisco, with vast
holdings in the lumber business, trucking company owner John L.
Keeshin in Chicago, and the Los Angeles syndicate fronted by Don
Ameche, MGM head Louis B. Mayer, and Benjamin Lindheimer, a
millionaire sportsman who owned horse tracks. Arrayed against those
forces, the NFL could offer only stability and tradition. The league's
decision to continue operating during the lean days of World War II thus
proved crucial. Had it suspended operations during the war, then tried to
resume on equal footing with the AAFC in 1946, the war between the
leagues might have been much more of a toss-up.
As it was, the NFL was more popular than ever in 1946. With the
lifting of travel restrictions, it resumed its barnstorming exhibition
schedule, with the Redskins opening in Los Angeles, playing in front of
68,188 at the first Los Angeles Times Charity Game, and playing games
across the Southeast. The league broke its all-time attendance record in
the regular season, averaging more than 31,000 per regular season
game.
But for all the success at the box office, the season was less successful
in the public perception. The AAFC took its share of headlines, with Paul
Brown and the Cleveland Browns featured in virtually every magazine in
the country that covered sports, including Time, Life, and Newsweek. The
College All-Star Game, the annual exhibition opener between the
defending NFL champion and a squad of college stars, took on a different
meaning with the Ward-orchestrated AAFC challenge to the NFL. Many
NFL owners were convinced that AAFC teams were offering an invitation
to the All-Star Game for those who signed with the new league, which
helped to explain why forty-four of the sixty All-Stars were headed to the
new league. Harder to explain was the final score, a 16–0 win for the
All-Stars over the Los Angeles Rams.
But the greatest crisis was an internal one. The 1946 campaign found

the Giants and Bears back on top of their respective divisions. Midway
through the season, New York shut out Chicago, 14–0, in a
championship preview, then coasted to the Eastern Conference title. Yet
the week before the title game, on the streets in New York, it was the
Bears who were installed as 10-point favorites over the Giants. This
raised the suspicion of New York detectives, who eventually uncovered
an attempt to fix the 1946 NFL championship game.
Back in Philadelphia on the eve of the game, Bell received a late-night
call from New York mayor William O'Dwyer, who had called Giants
running back Merle Hapes and quarterback Frank Filchock to Gracie
Mansion, where he and city detectives interrogated them. Filchock
insisted he hadn't heard a word about a proposed fix, while Hapes
admitted to the bribe attempt, from Sidney Paris, a convicted felon
who'd served four years for mail fraud, and had joined a group of Giants
boosters at an Elks Lodge gathering in New York City in late November.
Paris had spent the intervening weeks befriending Hapes and Filchock,
taking them out to the Copacabana, buying them drinks, offering them
jobs in the off-season, then had proposed, a week earlier, that each man
could become rich by making sure that the Giants lost by at least 10
points in the title game. Faced with that evidence, and with just hours to
go before the game, Bell suspended Hapes but agreed to let Filchock
play.
Under suspicion still, Filchock played valiantly the next day and
though he threw six interceptions in the 24–14 loss, few questioned that
he had tried his best. But in subsequent months, as the case went to
court, Filchock later ad mitted that he had been approached by gamblers
as well. It would turn out that while both players turned down Paris's
proposals, neither reported the case to the league, leaving the impression
in the informed circles of underworld gambling that the fix was in. Bell
suspended both players indefinitely.
At the January 1947 meetings, owners gave the commissioner the
latitude to suspend for life any player or team official involved in a
game-fixing attempt. Hapes and Filchock were suspended indefinitely;
Hapes, reinstated in 1954, never played in the NFL again, while
Filchock, reinstated in 1950, threw three passes for the Baltimore Colts
that season and retired.

Bell's action was decisive and crucial to public confidence. Coming on
the heels of the Brooklyn basketball point-shaving incident, in an era
when corruption was widespread in boxing, and the 1919 Black Sox
World Series scandal had occurred in most fans’ lifetimes, the threat of
game fixing was pervasive and severe.

Bell was convinced that the league needed to do more. In announcing
the Hapes and Filchock suspensions in April 1947, he stated,
“Professional football cannot continue to exist unless it is based upon
absolute honesty. The players must be not only absolutely honest; they
must be above suspicion. In short, the game and its players must be kept
free from corruption, from all bribes and offers of bribes and from any
possible ‘fixing’ of games.” Two months later, Bell announced that with
the beginning of the 1947 season, the league would publish in advance
of each game a list of players who were injured and would be unable or
unlikely to play. (This would be the precursor to the detailed injury lists
that would become a staple of midweek agate type in the ’70s.) With the
move, Bell struck a blow for fairness and open information and also,
paradoxically, made the first in a series of moves that would increase
betting interest in and gambling on pro football. It was certainly in the
NFL's interests to guarantee the public that the game was honest and
conducted fairly, and distributing names of injured players furthered
that cause. But it also gave those inclined to bet more information with
which to place their wager as well as greater confidence that they were
betting on an honest competition.
Bell was hardly a prude about gambling. A good deal of the money
that built the league had come from it—Tim Mara had been a
bookmaker on the lawn at Saratoga, Art Rooney owned a horse track
and was a skilled horse player (faithfully reporting his winnings to the
IRS), and the Bidwills owned a track, and made a fortune in the printing
of pari-mutuel tickets. Bell's philosophy was distinctly not one of
pretending that gambling didn't exist, but rather that it must be
monitored by the league. His preoccupation was that people, whether
they gambled or not, be reassured that the game was clean and beyond
reproach.
Having won for the time being a battle for public confidence in the
honesty of the game, Bell and the league returned their attention in

1947 to the war of attrition with the AAFC. With salaries skyrocketing in
1946 and 1947, it seemed that deeper pockets might be decisive. The
only teams to show a profit in 1946 were the two league champions, the
Browns in the AAFC (showing a profit of $10,553.89) and Halas's Bears.
The AAFC owners were prepared to lose money, and they did. In that
inaugural 1946 season, the San Francisco 49ers lost $51,000. Franchises
in New York, Chicago, and Los Angeles—fighting in markets with
established NFL teams—each suffered greater losses. For all that, the
league was developing a following, not just in Cleveland, but in Buffalo,
Los Angeles (where the Dons initially outdrew the Rams on the strength
of star Glen Dobbs and a better record), and San Francisco, where the
49ers were playing an exciting brand of football, with former Stanford
quarterback Frankie Albert leading Buck Shaw's slick T formation attack.
Ye t Bell's strategy remained the same. When private overtures were
made by Ben Lindheimer for the leagues to meet after the 1946 season,
Bell declined to meet. Publicly, as well, he refused to recognize the
league in any meaningful way. When asked about the AAFC, his
standard answer was, “No comment.” When the annual Pro Football
Illustrated— a picture-filled staple of concession stands throughout the
league—chose to preview both the NFL and the AAFC in 1947, the
publication was banned from NFL stadiums.
The AAFC owners would realize that the NFL's owners were more
resilient than they had hoped. Though the teams in Brooklyn and New
York had hurt the Giants, neither could gain a foothold of its own. The
Chicago Rockets were doomed in what became the three-team market of
Chicago, especially when the Cardinals rose up to win the NFL title in
1947 and advance to the title game again in 1948. At one point that
season, the increasingly desperate Arch Ward requested a private
meeting with Brown and asked him to “send” Otto Graham to the
Rockets for the good of the league, reasoning that the quarterback,
raised in nearby Waukegan, would be a boon to the Rockets’ woeful
attendance. This elicited a predictable response. Ward biographer
Thomas B. Littlewood wrote that “the coach fixed the sports editor in his
cold stare, issued an emphatic ‘no,’ and that was the last of that.”
Throughout the 1947 and 1948 seasons, as losses continued to mount
in both leagues, there was some back-channel communication. By the

beginning of 1949, columnist Stanley Woodward noted that the AAFC
was “being held together principally by Ward's skill and generosity in
spending other people's money.”
But the real problem was more fundamental—a lack of competition
had dampened interest in the AAFC in every city. Cleveland had been
the dominant team in the AAFC from day one, and their superiority was
becoming so accepted, it began to hurt the gate throughout the league.
After dropping a game to the Los Angeles Dons on October 12, 1947, the
Browns went nearly two years without another loss, winning the title
with a 12-1-1 record in 1947, sweeping through the 1948 schedule at
14-0, then beginning the 1949 season at 4-0-1 before the 49ers
ambushed them in San Francisco, 56–28, on October 2, 1949.
Browns players from that era would long remember their coach's
speech after the streak finally ended with the loss to the 49ers.
Returning to their hotel in Los Angeles, where they'd remain for another
week to play the Dons, some expected Brown would be conciliatory.
They soon found out otherwise. “There's a bus outside waiting to take
you through the movie studios,” he announced to the team. “Have fun. I
don't see how you can. Not after the way you played against San
Francisco. I'm telling you this and it's cold turkey. If those of you who
fell down on the job don't bounce back against Los Angeles, I'll get rid of
you. I mean that exactly. I don't care who you are, or how important you
may be. I'll get rid of you. If anyone thinks I'm kidding—just try me.
That's all.”
The speech was successful both in the short term (no players joined
the studio tour) and in the long term (the Browns routed the Dons, 61–
14, the next weekend and didn't lose again en route to their fourth
straight AAFC title).
By this time, many in the press were speculating about the Browns
“wrecking the league” with their persistent excellence. By that 1949
season, even the Cleveland fans were growing bored. After setting pro
attendance records in 1946 (averaging 48,556 per home game) and
again in 1947 (56,108), the team tailed off during its undefeated season
of 1948 (45,517) and saw attendance drop steeply during 1949
(31,600). It was a curious dilemma—a team hurting itself with success—
but Brown was steadfast in his commitment. “Don't worry about the

fans,” he told his team. “Whether there's 100 or 100,000, I want you to
score as many points as you can.”
While Cleveland steamrolled through the AAFC, the NFL was seeing
tight competition. In 1947, the Cardinals edged the Bears by a game for
the Western Conference title, then beat Philadelphia, 28–21, for their
only NFL title. The Eagles, whose fortunes had begun to turn shortly
after Bell sold his stake, went on to play in and win the next two league
titles, shutting out the Cardinals, 7–0, in 1948, and the Rams, 14–0, in
1949.
Finally, in December 1949, after two days of negotiations at
Philadelphia's Racquet Club, the AAFC capitulated, to terms not much
better than what they'd turned down a year before. Just two days before
the Browns were to play the 49ers in what would become the last AAFC
title game, the “merger” between the NFL and AAFC was announced,
with the new league accepting just three teams, the Browns, the 49ers,
and the Baltimore Colts (who'd agreed to pay Marshall a $50,000
territorial rights fee). Originally the new league was to be known as the
“National-American Football League.” But the flawed semantics couldn't
survive the off-season. Less than three months later, Bell announced that
the league would continue to be called the National Football League, and
that only the conferences would change their names, from East and West
to National and American (even those labels would last for just three
years; the Eastern and Western conference designations returned in
1953).
Brown and Marshall had developed a mutual dislike during the earlier
truce talks, and at the first meeting of the joint league, in the winter of
1950, they tangled again. Marshall wanted the Browns designated a
“swing team” in the realigned, thirteen-team NFL, with a schedule that
would have them playing each of the other teams just once. Brown
fought it bitterly, threatening to pull out if the Browns were so
designated. Bell acted as the conciliator, ultimately making Baltimore
the swing team. Brown would remember the Washington owner as an
“obnoxious” man who “insulted your intelligence and had a great habit
of sleeping most of the day and showing up at the meetings late in the

afternoon. We then had to stop the proceedings to brief him on all that
had been accomplished. By that time all of us were pretty tired and
ready to adjourn, but he was rested and mentally sharp. That was when
he tried to work some of his little deals.”
For all the discussion about which club would be the swing team, the
most important decision at the league meeting involved not divisional
structure but rules. Following the AAFC's lead in lifting limitations on
substitutions, the NFL announced that it would allow unlimited
substitutions in the 1950 season. This was a less obvious decision than it
seems in retrospect. Many who wrote about and coached the games in
the late ’40s thought that unlimited substitution would hurt football.
When Red Blaik used two platoons for Army in 1948, he was widely
criticized; during a game with Stanford at Yankee Stadium, the Cadets
were booed each time they changed units. But that game was a 43–0
blowout, and Bell was confident—with the leveling influence of the draft
—that such mismatches would be rare at the pro level, where
competitive balance was honed to a keener edge than in the wildly
divergent college ranks. In the long term, unlimited substitution would
bring about the end of football's renaissance men, the two-way players,
who would no longer play every down, but instead be used on one side
of the ball or the other, depending on where a coach thought they'd be
most helpful. In the short term, this meant that Brown could continue
the practice he'd devised in 1949, of calling the plays himself, and
shuttling them in by way of alternating guards. Impervious to the
criticism this drew from writers, and the terse but compliant response
afforded him by his quarterback, Graham, Brown was convinced that
calling the plays from the sidelines—with input from Collier and other
assistants in the press box—would afford him more control and make the
play calling more reliable and scientific.
For Bell, the merger, by any name, came as a personal triumph. In the
four years he'd been commissioner, he'd stabilized the league,
ameliorated some of its most heated bickering, helped bolster the
league's reputation, and fought off its greatest challenge. The league

meetings didn't get any less contentious—it still wasn't uncommon to
have lengthy discussions and a deadlocked vote on questions as minor as
whether to take a dinner break—but with Bell as the commissioner, the
spirit of the assemblage was more of brothers than antagonists.
For all Bell's efforts, there was still a question about whether the sport
of pro football could ever prosper. What Joe Carr had said before dying
in 1939 still largely held true: “No owner has made money from pro
football but a lot have gone broke thinking they could.” In 1948, the
Philadelphia Eagles were NFL champions, defeating the Chicago
Cardinals, 7–0, in the title game. They still lost money for the year, and
while some of that could be pegged to the war between the leagues, it
remained true that pro football had always been a high-risk enterprise
with a narrow profit margin. In 1948, the Eagles had revenues of
$624,782, with 86 percent of that sum coming from ticket sales. The
radio and television rights to their games brought in $20,975, or 3
percent of revenue, which was less than they earned for their exhibition
schedule, where they brought in $48,042. Their expenses were
$709,920, the primary cost being player payrolls, which accounted for
$268,819. In a booming postwar economy, playing in a large stadium, in
a major East Coast market, the world champions lost $85,000.
And yet, there was hope. Despite the losses, which had by the late ’40s
be come routine, there were signs of optimism. The Bears’ income passed
$1 million in 1948, and as the effect of the Browns was being felt
throughout both leagues, more clubs began conducting business on a
year-round basis. The American economy was booming and as the
postwar culture began to take shape, it was clear that all Americans
would have more leisure time, and many would spend much of that
watching sports.
The National Football League had ridden out a decade-long storm, its
primacy and viability intact. And though the business was small and
losses were often great, the league was nearing a point in which it could
seek some stability, after nearly a decade in which its very existence was
threatened.
Through it all, Bert Bell presided over the game, the cheerful
ambassador and tough policeman who, through the sheer force of will,
made sure that pro football would be in a position to thrive in the years

ahead.
The writer John Steadman remembered Bell vividly from this period,
walking into a press room filled with reporters covering an annual
league meeting in Philadelphia, carrying the religion of pro football with
his typical room-filling exuberance. “Who wants chicken sandwiches?”
bellowed the commissioner. “Who wants chocolate ice cream? Who
wants beer? Order what you want, boys, it's on the Eagles. They made
all the money this year.”
