SOURCE_ID: americas_game_chapter_04
SOURCE_TYPE: book
AUTHOR: Michael MacCambridge
SECTION: Chapter 4

4 Going Deep

Inside the dimly lit visitors locker room in the bowels of Birmingham's
Legion Field, Paul “Tank” Younger sat on a wooden bench, too tired to
pull his jersey over his shoulder pads, too spent to ask one of his
Grambling College teammates for help. It was late afternoon, January 2,
1948, and the Tigers had just lost a hard-fought game, 27–21, to Central
State (Ohio) in the Vulcan Bowl, the annual postseason classic billed as
“the Rose Bowl for black colleges.”
Younger was a strapping, quietly confident bull of a man, 6-foot-2,
220 pounds, with a calm demeanor, and a fierce work ethic. Though
only a junior, he was already regarded among the loose confederation of
writers and coaches who followed the black colleges as the best player in
black college football. He'd run for 1,207 yards and 18 touchdowns that
season, and passed for 11 more.
Dejected and quiet, Younger's expression didn't change when
Grambling's clubhouse attendant walked up to him and said, in a low
voice, “Tank … there's a man here to see you.”
Younger asked him what he wanted.
“I don't know. Says he's looking for you.”
“Well,” said Younger, “tell him he'll have to wait.”
The attendant looked perturbed, and as his eyes searched the floor for
words, he interjected a clarification.
“Man's a white man,” the attendant added. “Says he's with the Los
Angeles Rams.”

Younger sighed, and stood up, and followed the attendant to the door
of the locker room, where amidst the postgame bustle stood a short, wiry
man, sporting a wrinkled suit and an easy smile.
“Tank, I'm Eddie Kotal of the Los Angeles Rams,” he said, greeting
Younger with a handshake. “I've been watching you.”
Kotal explained to Younger that he was the Rams’ college scout, and
that he spent most of his year traveling the country watching college
football players, to help the team decide who to take in the annual NFL
draft. Kotal often found himself explaining his occupation, since he was
at the time the only person in the country with such a job, the first fulltime, traveling scout in all of pro football. He had read and heard about
Younger, was familiar with his feats, and asked him if he might be
interested in playing pro football someday. Younger answered that he
certainly would be. The two men spoke a few minutes more and, before
leaving, Kotal promised, “I'll stay in touch with you— and I'll be
watching.”
At the time Kotal met Younger, there were only four blacks in the
National Football League. Each came from a major college, and had been
offered jobs after their war service was up. There had yet to be a black
selected in the National Football League draft. The dozens of historically
black colleges that populated the Southeast and Atlantic Coast were
ignored by pro football. Not a single player from any of the schools had
ever been offered a tryout with a pro team. Conventional wisdom held
that no one “at that level of competition” could play in the pro game.
The blinkered mind-set was consistent with the state of scouting in pro
football at the time, a haphazard pursuit that head coaches and assistant
coaches took up in their spare time. In the early winter, they would
make several calls around the country, to coaching cronies and others in
football, to gather recommendations. They'd show up to the drafts in
February armed with some notes and preseason football annuals—
Stanley Woodward's College Football and Street & Smith's College Football
were two perennial favorites— and select players about whom they
knew precious little.
Meanwhile, in Los Angeles, the Rams were executing the blueprint for
the future of pro football scouting. Dan Reeves was the first owner to

recognize not just the importance but also the potential of scouting. He
hired Kotal in 1946, and together they implemented a system of scouting
that dwarfed in scope anything ever attempted. Kotal was a full-time
employee who was away from the office 200 days a year, driving from
campus to campus, combing the country in the spring and the fall to
develop a network with coaches and to see as many potential pro
football players as he could find.
And what stuck with Tank Younger after his meeting with Kotal, what
made him shake his head and whistle to himself in sincere amazement,
was the plain fact: the first full-time scout in pro football had come to
Birmingham, just to watch Grambling College's Paul “Tank” Younger—
and he was only a junior.
So complete was the willful ignorance among the rest of the NFL teams
about players in black college football that the Rams didn't even use a
pick for Younger in the twenty-five-round draft held in February 1949.
But shortly thereafter, Kotal stopped at Grambling to sign Younger to a
free agent contract, making him the first player from a historically black
school to be signed by a pro football team.
What was nothing but a line of agate in most newspapers was a
historic occasion for the black colleges, a harbinger of hope for the
future of integration in sports. In July, before Younger left for the Rams’
training camp, Grambling coach Eddie Robinson sat down with him and
methodically explained what Younger might expect: a cold shoulder
from many of his teammates, late hits and dirty play from opponents,
and likelihood of racial slurs wherever he turned. “You have to let it go
in one ear and out the other,” Robinson implored, looking into Younger's
eyes. “You have to make the ball club.”
In this, Robinson was unusually adamant, emphasizing that the stakes
went beyond Younger and a professional football career. “Tank, if you
go up there and you don't make it, there's no telling how long it'll be
before somebody else gets a chance,” said Robinson. “They'll be able to
say, ‘We took the best you had to offer, and he wasn't good enough.’ ”
The success of Dan Reeves's scouting system was not yet apparent to the

rest of the league, but by 1949 it would propel the Rams into their first
of three consecutive NFL championship games, and solidify Reeves as
the league's premier innovator in what would increasingly be viewed as
the most important element in pro football management: evaluation of
college football players. After hiring Kotal in 1946, Reeves began to
assemble a dossier on every senior in the country. Kotal would then set
out by car in the beginning of the spring, at about the time teams began
their spring practices, and would hit most of the major universities in
the months ahead. While many in the Rams’ office suspected he took
advantage of his expense account and lack of supervision (“apparently
there were a lot of good prospects up by Vegas,” said one fellow Rams
employee), Kotal unquestionably delivered the goods. After returning in
the late spring to spend two months going over reports and providing
analysis, he would hop back in his car and crisscross the country once
more, from the early days of school's preseason training camps through
the end of the year, watching games on Saturday, taking Sunday to
travel, then hitting anywhere from five to ten schools per week, where
he would talk with coaches, look at game film, get 40-yard dash times
and as much other information as he could muster. After a dinner often
spent alone, Kotal would return to his hotel room to write more reports.
Meanwhile, the club had more than 100 bird dogs around the country
— mostly college head and assistant coaches, who filled out biannual
reports for $100 a year. In Los Angeles, the Rams also hired a number of
high school coaches to come in nightly and watch film of potential
prospects.
At the same time, a staff of assistants in the Rams’ offices sent out
questionnaires to every school in the country, asking for the raw data
and coaches’ comments to provide a dossier on each true prospect. The
reports from the coaches across the country came into a small room in
the Rams’ offices, where they would be sorted, collated, alphabetized,
and placed into a series of chunky three-ring binders. Behind the desk in
Reeves's office at the Rams’ headquarters was a giant map of the United
States, divided into six sections. Within each section was a series of
pushpins showing every four-year college in the country that played
football. From this haystack of data came the occasional needle of vital,
original information. Part of the routine was to send personnel sheets to

players as soon as they were identified as prospects in their junior year.
One sheet that came back to the Rams’ office late in 1948 was from
Oregon quarterback Norman Van Brocklin. The young passer was
considered one of the nation's top prospects, and ideally suited for the
frequent passing of the T formation offense. Kotal, reading over Van
Brocklin's questionnaire one night, fixed upon one of his fill-in-the-blank
answers: under the heading “When will you graduate?” Van Brocklin
had scrawled in “49 ma?” Following up on the lead, the Rams
discovered that Van Brocklin was ahead in his studies and might be able
to graduate in three and a half years. Armed with that information, they
selected him in the second round of the 1949 draft, to yelps of protest
from other owners in the league, when the pick was announced at the
draft in Chicago.
But Van Brocklin was indeed able to finish his studies early—finding
the last class he needed in a summer session at Swarthmore—and Bell
approved the selection, allowing Van Brocklin to join the Rams in 1949,
where he would quickly press the All-Pro Waterfield for playing time.
It wasn't just scouting in which the Rams paced the league. For much
of the ’50s they were among the NFL's prime innovators in strategy,
marketing, design, and public relations. Success at the box office would
take longer.
Saddled with the obligation of the extra $5,000 guaranteed to all
visiting teams, plus the major expenses of moving the franchise from
Cleveland and the war of publicity and words with the rival Dons of the
AAFC, Reeves suffered staggering losses in his early years on the coast.
In 1946, the club posted a disappointing 6-4-1 record and lost $161,000,
after which Reeves fired both of the Walshes and committed himself to
the constant supervision of the franchise, assuming the general
manager's role. New coach Bob Snyder was unable to reverse the trend
in 1947, while the Dons continued to outdraw the Rams, and the Rams
lost $184,000, forcing Reeves to bring in partners.
Facing a fifth season of losses exceeding $50,000, he was in danger of
falling victim to the government's “hobby” law, which stipulated that
anyone who lost more than $50,000 five years in a row could no longer
write off those losses as a business expense and, further, would have to
pay a tax on the total amount deducted in the previous years. Reeves

took in three partners, including wealthy UCLA alum Ed Pauley, Jr., a
Democratic Party power and oil businessman who was an avid
sportsman. (UCLA's basketball arena, Pauley Pavilion, would eventually
bear his name.)

Each of the investors paid just $1 for a stake in the team, agreeing to
bear a portion of any future losses. Though Reeves's total share had
dipped to just 30 percent by 1949, he wasn't worried. His old Cleveland
partner and close friend Fred Levy still controlled 20 percent, and all the
partners signed an agreement giving Reeves final say on football
decisions unless partners controlling a majority of the shares opposed
him.
Even as the losses accrued, Reeves's changes were already bringing the
Rams to the verge of success, both on the field and at the box office. In
the offseason of 1947, he'd fired his public relations man, Maxwell Stiles,
because there had been grumbling among the other papers that Stiles
was leaking stories to his friends and colleagues at the Long Beach PressTelegram.
Through a friend of one of the partners in Reeves's stock brokerage,
Reeves received a recommendation of Tex Schramm, then a twenty-sixyear-old sports editor of the Austin American-Statesman, who'd recently
graduated from the University of Texas on the GI Bill. He'd grown up in
Southern California and a few years earlier had done some work for the
Los Angeles Times.
The young Tex Schramm was not yet the force of nature that he would
become in later decades, but even in his college years he had made quite
an impression as a gruff, handsome, whip-smart young journalist who
was a decent writer, an excellent reporter, and—a rare thing in Texas—
an avid fan of pro football.
Reeves invited Schramm to Los Angeles for an interview, and was
immediately impressed with the young man's wit and maturity. At a
salary of $4,000, Schramm accepted the job and moved with his wife,
Marty, from Austin back to the Los Angeles suburb of San Gabriel, not
far from where Schramm had played high school football in Alhambra.
Schramm's assignment was a grinding one, but typical of what pro
football teams did to get press coverage in the era. The five daily

newspapers in Los Angeles were competitive, but understaffed, and most
couldn't afford a daily beat reporter for both pro football teams. On
many days during the season, the Rams’ publicist had to write the stories
himself, altering the leads slightly at each newspaper. Even columns
occasionally had to be fabricated out of whole cloth, often in the style of
the writer. This was particularly painful in the case of writers like John
B. Old, whose hackneyed style was amplified by his own personal index
card file of clichés.
In that first season, Schramm improved everything he touched, from
the amount of coverage the Rams received in local papers and the
number of write-ups generated in other cities, to the quality of the
clipping service the team used for its scrapbook and the quality and
readability of its game programs (which around the league at that time
consisted of little more, in Schramm's words, than “a bunch of head
shots with a Coke ad in the middle”).
After Reeves and Kotal agreed that they needed to do more to scout
the hundreds of small colleges around the country, it was Schramm who
came up with the inspired idea of getting scouting tips for free, through
the ruse of “Tom Harmon's Little All-America Team.” Using the Michigan
star and former Rams player as a beard of sorts, the Rams sent out
“voting ballots” to coaches at every small school in the country that
played football, asking them to name the five best players they played
against. That gave them early lines on such future Hall of Famers as
Andy Robustelli, from tiny Arnold College in Connecticut, and Dick
“Night Train” Lane from Scottsbluff Community College in Nebraska.
By 1949, Schramm was promoted from the PR job, and given the title
assistant to the president, and began performing many of the duties of a
traditional general manager. As his replacement, he hired his old friend
Tex Maule, another atypically avid pro football fan from Texas, whose
eclectic back ground had included time as a circus trapeze artist and a
merchant seaman. Each man knew enough about football to provide
valued help with Reeves's relatively comprehensive draft preparation,
and helped the Rams further distance themselves from the rest of the
league.

Then, too, there were instances of pure serendipity. One of the players
on those Rams teams was Fred Gehrke, a halfback from Utah, who had
first played with the Rams when the franchise was in Cleveland in 1940,
then spent the war working as an aviation artist for Northrop
Engineering, rejoining the club in 1945. Gehrke, an art major in college,
was fascinated with the idea of painting a logo on the Rams’ drab brown
leather helmets. When he tried to explain the idea to Bob Snyder, the
coach couldn't even understand what he was talking about. Showing a
sketch of a helmet with a ram's horn to Schramm, Gehrke explained the
concept again and, with Schramm's encouragement, brought a helmet
home. Working in his garage, he painted the entire outer surface of the
helmet blue, and then painted the outline of a ram's horn on each side.
Filling in the outline with bright gold paint, Gehrke created an
eyecatching effect unlike anything ever seen before on a helmet. It
wasn't so literal as the painting of a ram, or as realistic as a drawing of
an actual ram's horn. Instead the graceful rendition was a
representational, nearly experimental, depiction of a ram's horn,
spiraling out from the front brim, sweeping up across the crown of the
helmet, and looping back down to an upturned tip by the ear hole. It
was a work of modern art on the side of a football helmet.
Dan Reeves loved it, and dispatched Gehrke back to his home to paint
every helmet that the Rams owned, paying him $1 per helmet plus
expenses. When the team took the field for the traditional exhibition
opener at L.A. Coliseum against the Redskins in August of 1948—blue
jerseys with gold numerals, blue-and-gold helmets gleaming under the
night lights—they were greeted by extended, appreciative applause. As
an aesthetic statement, Gehrke's helmet design was a masterpiece of pop
art. As a utilitarian move, it was equally successful, making the team and
its players instantly recognizable, and starting a revolution of helmet
design that would, in the coming years, be felt at every level of football.
Decades later, the popular artist LeRoy Neiman would say of the Rams’
helmet design, “It is the most effective pop art symbol in all of sports. It
captures the very purpose of the helmet—to ram someone. How
satisfying it must be, for the artist, to see his art functioning every
Sunday.”
After the disappointing 6-6 record in 1947, the Rams hired Clark

Shaughnessy to be the team's “technical adviser,” working as an assistant
to head coach Bob Snyder.
Throughout the ’40s, the mercurial Shaughnessy was regarded as the
reigning genius of football strategy as well as, perhaps, a less-thanbalanced man, one who seemed so preoccupied with the strategies and
tactics of the game that the rest of the world seemed to escape his
notice.
After stops at Maryland and Pitt during the war, he took his first fulltime pro job in 1947 as an assistant with the Washington Redskins, and
was summoned to Los Angeles after that season, at the behest of Snyder,
who had played for the Bears when Shaughnessy was advising the team.
Reeves was so dazzled by Shaughnessy's brilliance that he fired Snyder
in the preseason, and named Shaughnessy the head coach. Taking
advantage of his newfound authority, Shaughnessy soon began an
extensive series of changes designed to modernize the attack. He held
two-a-day practices throughout training camp, even practicing in the
morning on days when the team was playing an evening exhibition
game.
As the tactics grew more complex, so did the terminology that
accompanied them. And Shaughnessy's lexicon was the most extensive in
the sport. Offensive formations were based on a combination of
directional signals and the commands that plowing farmers gave to their
mules. An end out wide to the right side was “east,” to the left side was
“west.” The left halfback in motion to the right was “gee,” the right
halfback in motion to the left was “haw.” For blocking, he used a
combination of mnemonic cues, what he called “memory hooks,” and
masculine (for blocks on linemen and linebackers) and feminine
(defensive backs) names. From these formulas came a blinding array of
blitz, pass rush, and secondary coverage calls that could be as simple as
“Green Tornado” or as complicated as “Brown Stash Mutt Purple Jack
Shuffle Right Wheel Left.” (Though his complex vocabulary wouldn't
survive, many of its principles—especially the homonyms and mnemonic
cues—would carry into the modern day.)
When Tank Younger showed up to training camp in 1949, he was
presented with the full-frontal assault of Shaughnessy's complex
terminology. Told to study and learn the thick book with its obscure and

intricate lexicon, he was initially intimidated. Younger had experienced
nothing like it at Grambling, where Eddie Robinson's simple playbook
contained a reverse play known as Douglas MacArthur (“I shall return”),
and little rhyme or reason in the numbering system used to determine
nomenclature. The first night of camp, Younger went to the pay phone at
the end of the hall in the Redlands College dorm, and called Robinson,
who provided reassurance and an explanation. Though he didn't use
much of Shaughnessy's system, Robinson was familiar with the
terminology, and helped Younger find the logic within it.
Back at Grambling, Younger's tryout was considered so vital that
Robinson had started subscribing to all of Los Angeles's daily
newspapers. Each afternoon during that late summer, Robinson and
Grambling athletic news director Collie Nicholson went to the university
library, to parse the sports pages for clues to Younger's progress. They
celebrated one September morning when they read a staff story in the
Los Angeles Times, which noted that “Younger, the continually surprising
Negro, virtually nailed down the No. 1 right-half position with his
vicious blocking and running.”
Younger lived up to his promise. In the Rams’ first exhibition game, at
home in the Los Angeles Times Charity Game against the Redskins, he
was introduced with the Rams starters and as the PA announcer
introduced “Tank Younger, Grambling College” he burst forth in a full
sprint from the Coliseum tunnel and received a rousing cheer from the
crowd of 90,000. That night, he found himself at linebacker, trying to
keep up with the Redskins’ fleet back Dick Sandifer. When Sandifer
broke free past Younger on a pass route, the rookie simply jumped and
tackled Sandifer, bringing an inevitable defensive penalty. On the
sidelines, Shaughnessy brought Younger over and berated him for the
foul. “But Coach,” said Younger, “you told us if we thought someone was
getting away from us, to just tackle him to save a touchdown.” Shaughnessy looked at him for a moment, then turned to the Rams’ trainer and
said, “Wipe this boy off and get him back in the game.” Tank Younger
went back in, knowing he'd made the team.
In that 1949 season, the Rams became the most dangerous team in the

league. The mother lode of draft talent matured quickly, with Van
Brocklin earning playing time at quarterback and Younger starring on
both sides of the ball, as a fullback and linebacker. Heisman winner and
Army legend Glenn Davis completed his Army commitment, giving the
team a gifted receiver out of the backfield. Vitamin T. Smith was drafted
from tiny Abilene Christian, and instantly made a contribution in the
backfield.
Shaughnessy's 1949 team also boasted an array of speed never before
seen in pro football, with six school sprint champions on the roster, five
of whom had recorded sub-10.0 times in the 100-yard dash. The key
acquisition was the signing of Elroy “Crazy Legs” Hirsch, the gamebreaking halfback who had grown tired of the struggles in the AAFC
with the Chicago Rockets and jumped to the Rams. Shaughnessy treated
Hirsch with great care, putting him on a daily five-mile running regimen
to strengthen his injured leg, and fitting him with a lightweight but
strong helmet of molded plastic (which would within three years become
the industry standard, replacing leather helmets) to prevent concussions.
Hirsch found a new position in Los Angeles. Shaugh-nessy moved him
out of the backfield and away from the line of scrimmage, as the league's
first true flanker back, offset from the line of scrimmage and several
yards wide of the tight end. With Bob Shaw staying at the end of the
interior line, and Tom Fears split out on the other side, the Rams became
the first team to use three ends consistently, and since all three were
talented, opposing teams had trouble containing them. In their last six
regular season games, en route to winning the Western Conference title,
the Rams scored more than 40 points four times.
But on the morning of the 1949 title game, as rain approached
monsoonlike conditions in Los Angeles, much of that speed was
neutralized. In a storm that Younger would characterize as “a Louisiana
frog strangler,” Greasy Neale's Eagles shut down the Rams’ attack, and
emerged with a 14–0 win, their second straight title. Among those in
attendance that day, sitting high up in the press box, keeping to himself,
making precise, detailed notes, was Browns assistant Blanton Collier.
The “merger” with the AAFC had been announced days earlier, and Paul
Brown was already hard at work on the next season.
“The worst team in our league could beat the best team in theirs,”

huffed George Preston Marshall about the upstart AAFC and the three
teams who would be joining the NFL in 1950. The schedule for the 1950
season was announced in April, and Bert Bell had done his work well.
On the eve of the opening Sunday slate of five games, the season would
kick off with a single game Saturday night, September 16, at
Philadelphia's Municipal Stadium, with the two-time defending NFL
champion Eagles playing host to the four-time AAFC title-holder Browns.
It was dubbed by many in the press as “The World Series of Pro
Football.”
During the exhibition season, the Browns swept through the NFL's
lesser lights in a way sure to guarantee attention and resentment,
averaging 35 points per game en route to a 5-0 record. The finale was
played at War Memorial Stadium in Buffalo, a merciless rout of the
Steelers that was never as close as the 41–31 final score would indicate.
As the teams headed to the locker room at halftime, Steelers defensive
end Bob Davis yelled at the Browns, “This isn't football! You guys ought
to join the Celtics!”
The Steelers discovered what the rest of the league would know soon
enough: Cleveland's personnel was excellent, and it had developed a pass
offense that, if not ahead of the Rams in speed or sophistication, was
more precisely calibrated. The NFL hadn't seen anything like the Browns’
precision “comeback” patterns, with Dante Lavelli and Dub Jones
snapping off their down-and-out routes by taking sharper angles to the
sidelines, coming back to Graham's passes in a way that made it nearly
impossible to defend.
In the opener, the Browns would confront what many regarded as one
of the NFL's all-time great squads. The Eagles’ offense was anchored by
star running back Steve Van Buren, a classic bruiser instrumental to the
team's back-to-back titles. The key to coach Greasy Neale's “Eagle”
defense was beefy middle guard Bucko Kilroy, who lined up over the
center and controlled the holes to either side, allowing the other four
linemen to concentrate on containing outside runs. It was widely felt,
especially after the Eagles shut out the Rams in the 1949 title game, that
the “Eagle” defense was impregnable to the pass.
In front of 71,237 fans, the Browns kicked off and held the Eagles on
three plays, forcing a punt, which Cleveland's Don Phelps returned 64

yards for a touchdown, only to have the play called back by a clipping
penalty. Graham threw three straight incompletions on that first
possession, each revealing in its own way. With the Browns sending
running back Rex Baumgardner in motion, to be picked up by a
linebacker, the Eagles consistently put defensive halfback Russ Craft on
right halfback Dub Jones, who was coming out of the backfield and
running 10-yard square-out routes to the sidelines. Graham didn't throw
to Jones, but noticed that Craft was covering him more closely each
time, inching up toward the receiver in hopes of a possible interception.
When Cleveland got the ball again, now down 3–0, Graham called a
similar pattern, with Baumgardner again drawing the attention of the
linebacker, and Dante Lavelli and Mac Speedie drawing the safeties with
curl patterns in the middle of the field. Jones again ran a square-out, but
this time, when Craft charged toward the sideline for an interception,
Jones shifted his route to an out-and-up, and was far behind Craft
streaking down the sidelines when he caught Graham's expertly lofted
59-yard touchdown pass.
Surreptitiously, the Browns were also widening their running lanes.
Early on in the game, Cleveland came to the line of scrimmage with
their linemen spaced a few inches further apart than usual. They'd hold
that spacing for a while, then widen again a few plays later. Since both
the Philadelphia defensive tackles tended to line up just off the outside
shoulder of the offensive guard across the line of scrimmage, the Eagles’
blind adherence to this alignment widened the gaps between their two
tackles, where only Bucko Kilroy was operating. Philadelphia paid the
price on trap plays that sprang the bruising Marion Motley for big runs.
A Motley fumble deep in Browns territory gave the Eagles a chance at
changing the momentum. But after Cleveland stoned the Eagles four
times inside the Cleveland five-yard line, the rout was on. The Browns
led 14–3 at the half en route to a resounding 35–10 win.
After the game, Neale churlishly dismissed the Browns as “a team that
does nothing but pass,” but among the Eagles players, there were few
excuses. A dismayed Russ Craft said, “We just never played against a
team that threw to a spot as well as Cleveland. We would be on top of
their receivers but they caught the ball anyway because it was so well
timed. It was like trying to cover three Don Hutsons … impossible …

impossible.”
Bert Bell entered the Browns’ locker room beaming, congratulating
Brown for his part in the win, and calling the Browns “the best-coached
football team I've ever seen.”
For the rest of the season, the Browns were in the crosshairs, as the
established league tried to find a way to beat them. While the two other
AAFC entries, the Colts and the 49ers, stumbled to a combined 4-20
record, the Browns carried the flag for the defunct league, going 10-2
during the 1950 regular season. The only team with any success against
them was the New York Giants, who, under the exacting leadership of
veteran coach Steve Owen, had devised a defense to counteract the
Browns; it looked similar to a 6-1, except that the two ends were decoys,
who often peeled away at the snap into short zones, to prevent the
Browns’ short passes to the shallow areas behind the line. Behind them
came four defensive backs, arranged in a wide arc, with the cornerbacks
playing closer to the line of scrimmage and the safeties in the center of
the field further back. The defense, known as “the umbrella,” was
directed on the field by an AAFC refugee named Tom Landry, a cool,
analytical defensive back with little speed but a professor's sense of calm
rationalism and a comprehensive knowledge of the Browns’ personnel.
Sometimes the ends would drop into coverage, at other times they would
rush the quarterback, and this mixture of looks confounded Otto Graham
and frustrated the Browns’ short passing game. In the teams’ first
meeting, Graham couldn't complete a single pass in the first half.
Losing both games to the Giants, Cleveland wound up tied with New
York for the Eastern Conference championship. In the playoff game, the
Browns prevailed in a 9–7 struggle, with three Groza field goals
providing the margin, and earning the team a berth in the NFL
championship game in its first season in the NFL. Across the country,
ready in waiting, were the Los Angeles Rams, who had run through
another season of dominating performances.
The loss to the Eagles in the 1949 championship game had led to
another eventful off-season in Los Angeles. In February, assistant coach
Joe Stydahar came to Reeves with news that his old teammate Gene
Ronzani had been named head coach of the Green Bay Packers, and
wanted Stydahar to be his top assistant. Before giving Stydahar

permission to leave, Reeves asked for forty-eight hours to work out
details. When Stydahar returned two days later, set to say his goodbyes,
Reeves greeted him by saying, “Joe, you are the new head coach of the
Los Angeles Rams.” The stunning turn of events, firing Shaughnessy,
football's most famous innovator, for an assistant coach who was well
liked but unversed in the intricacies of the Rams’ attack, left Stydahar
speechless and his former mentor uncharacteristically bitter. Asked for
his reaction to the news, Shaughnessy said, “Stydahar coach of the
Rams? Why, I could take a high school team and beat him.” (To those
closest to the team, the shocking decision was less surprising.
Shaughnessy's eccentricities had continued unabated, and as the
playbook grew thicker each week, even the good soldier Waterfield had
bridled near the end of the 1949 season.)
Stydahar was a player's coach but an old-school footballer, whom Pat
Summerall once described as “the only man I have ever known who
could smoke a cigar, chew tobacco and drink whiskey at the same time.”
In an attempt to replace Shaughnessy's technical expertise, Stydahar
hired his former Bears teammate, Hampton Pool, then an assistant coach
at Santa Barbara Junior College. A keen tactician in his own right, Pool
wound up devising much of the game plans for both offense and defense
for the Rams.
Reeves's other major decision over the off-season would have broader
implications, as it involved an embrace of the emerging technology of
television. Though World War II brought technical experimentation to a
halt, research and testing began in earnest following the war, when in
1946 DuMont and NBC aired nine hours and thirty minutes of primetime programming each week, with nearly four hours of that devoted to
sports programming. The most popular of the early sports shows was The
Gillette Cavalcade of Sports, owned by the razor manufacturer and
broadcast on NBC. Gillette had been one of the earliest believers in the
potential of TV, already having realized huge market share gains due to
sports broadcasts on radio. The Cavalcade was a weekly boxing show
from Madison Square Garden. The format of boxing, with plenty of
action taking place in a small, well-lit area, was perfectly suited to
television and the medium's limitations at the time, which tended to
make any medium or long shots unrecognizable. The popularity of

boxing on television grew quickly, prompting one writer to remark “the
passionate affair between television and professional fighting turned into
an orgy.”
The makers of Gillette sensed what others in the business would soon
find out. Sports on television fueled the wholesale purchase of sets. NBC
producer Harry Coyle recalled,“When we put on the World Series in
1947, heavyweight fights, the Army-Navy football game, the sales of
television sets just spurted.” In a postwar boom that saw car sales
mushroom, television purchases did the same, jumping from 7,000 sets
in 1946 to 14,000 in 1947 to 172,000 in 1948. Sales still lagged on the
West Coast because the coaxial cable required to feed broadcasts
through a network hadn't made it over the Rocky Mountains, leaving
stations in California forced to run shows from networks later, after they
had been converted to film or kinescopes.
While boxing was dominating the airwaves, Major League Baseball
was moving gingerly to embrace the new medium, and often meeting
disastrous consequences when doing so. After winning the NL pennant in
1948, the Boston Braves sold the rights to televise all their home games
in 1949 and 1950, and nearly all of them in 1951 and 1952. By the end
of the contract, despite having a contender in three of those four
seasons, their attendance had dropped from 1,455,000 in 1948 to
281,278 in 1952, and they were soon on their way out of town. The
Cleveland Indians were among baseball's powers in the same period, but
after televising many of their home games for eight seasons, they'd seen
their attendance drop 67 percent. Overall attendance in Major League
Baseball dropped from nearly 21 million in 1948 to 14.3 million in
1953.
And if television hurt the majors, it's fair to say that it nearly killed the
minor leagues. From an all-time high of 42 million in 1949, attendance
would drop to 13 million by the end of the ’50s. Fans wouldn't travel
downtown to see minor league baseball when they could watch the big
clubs on their home television or at the corner tavern.
All this would seem obvious after the fact, but the patterns were not
yet so clear in 1950. With the Browns set to join the NFL that season,
Paul Brown offered the exclusive television sponsorship rights to the
Browns’ games to Cleveland Gas and Electric for $5,000. “They said that

seemed high,” he recalled. “I had to convince them. They gave me the
money, but it was more to humor me than anything else.”
The Rams, who had lost money even as they advanced to the
championship game in 1949, were searching for any way they might
increase revenues. The Admiral Television Company approached the
team with an offer to broadcast all their home games. (Live broadcasts of
road games back to the West Coast remained a technical impossibility.)
Reeves was ambivalent about the risk to the home gate, which had
averaged nearly 50,000 per game in the
1949 season. Ultimately, the Rams struck a unique deal with Admiral.
After Schramm spent some time researching league attendance records,
the team calculated that they could fairly expect a 10 percent increase in
attendance, and added a provision to the contract stipulating that any
attendance short of a 10 percent increase would be compensated by
Admiral. That August, as the high-powered Rams were providing
glimpses of their offensive potential (scoring 70 points against Baltimore
in a game in San Antonio), ads were running in the Los Angeles papers
promising live pro football in the home.
After losing a closely fought opener at home to the Chicago Bears, the
Rams won eight of their next nine games, during which they unveiled
the most potent 1-2 passing attack in pro football history. In a year when
the rest of the league's teams averaged 176 yards per game passing,
Waterfield and Van Brocklin averaged 294 yards per game, throwing for
a combined 29 touchdowns in 12 games. The team would set twenty-two
scoring records that season, averaging 38.8 points per game, an NFL
record that still stood in 2004.
Defenses facing the Rams confronted an array of problems. Tom Fears
was the league's best possession receiver on one side, the flanker Hirsch
a fleet, dexterous burner on the other side. And they were joined by Bob
“Seabiscuit” Boyd, a blazing fast end who had been a freshman at
Compton Community College when the Rams began their first training
camp in 1946. The rookie caught only 17 passes in 1950, but his speed
made him a terror to cover, especially when he came into the game as a
third end in Pool's three-receiver sets.
In a three-game homestand in October, the Rams rolled to 163 points,

then scored 88 during their next two road games. By the end of the 1950
season, the Rams’ aura of glamour was felt throughout the country. It
owed to the spectacular quality of their passing game, the celebrity of
minority owner Bob Hope, the cachet of the team's Beverly Hills address,
a fan base studded with Hollywood executives and stars, even the
Gehrke-designed helmet (which by

1950 was even shinier, with the design baked into the plastic shell,
saving Gehrke from repainting the helmets each week).
Of course, having a few movie starlet wives didn't hurt: Waterfield was
still often referred to as “Mr. Jane Russell.” Tom Harmon, married to
actress Elyse Knox, quit the game in 1947 after two injury-plagued
seasons, but by 1949, another Heisman winner, Glenn Davis, joined the
team. His wife, Terry Moore, was also in the movies. And then there was
Hirsch, whose movie star looks—strong jaw, sweeping shock of hair—
got him on the silver screen, where he starred as himself in Crazylegs, the
1953 biopic that featured several Rams in smaller roles.
And yet for all this, despite the success, excitement, and national
reputation, it was a horrible season at the box office, with the Rams
suffering an attendance decline of nearly 50 percent, from 49,854 per
game to 26,804. No conclusion could be reached other than that
televising home games was directly responsible for the loss in
attendance. After a 51–14 rout of the Green Bay Packers clinched a
playoff showdown with the Bears for the Western Conference title, the
Admiral Television experiment came to an end. The playoff win over the
Bears, played in Los Angeles but not broadcast on local television, drew
83,501, and fairly rang the death knell of home television for the Rams
and, as it would turn out, the rest of the league. Following the season,
Admiral paid $307,000 to the Rams to cover the cost of the attendance
drop. “This was back,” noted Schramm, “when $300,000 was a lot of
money.”
The 1950 championship game match-up had an eerie sense of déjà vu,
with the Cleveland Browns playing host to the Rams. For Reeves,
Waterfield, and the rest of the Rams, it was their first return to
Cleveland since winning the world title in 1945. For the Browns, it was a
chance to complete their quest for an NFL title and, in so doing, reassert
the validity of each of their four previous AAFC crowns.

In subfreezing conditions, with a cruel thirty-mile-an-hour wind
coming in from Lake Erie, the game was played in front of a modest
Christmas Eve crowd of 29,751 at Cleveland Stadium.
The two potent offenses slashed back and forth throughout the game,
overwhelming two capable defenses. Midway through the fourth quarter,
Graham converted two fourth downs into first downs, and completed a
long drive with his fourth touchdown pass of the day, to move the
Browns to within 28–27. After a Cleveland stand, the Browns got the ball
back with just over five minutes left and moved steadily downfield.
Graham had just gained a first down on a quarterback draw when
linebacker Milan Lazetich hit him from behind, forcing a fumble
recovered by the Rams at their own 22-yard line with just 3:16 to play.
“It was the lowest moment of my life,” Graham would say later.
“Honestly, I was more devastated at that moment than I was a few years
ago when the doctor told me I had cancer.” As he reached the sideline,
Graham's head was bowed in dejection, preparing for a grilling from his
coach. But instead of criticizing, Brown put his hand on his quarterback's
shoulder and told him, “Don't worry, Otts. We'll get the ball back for you
and win this thing yet.”
The Browns held and, with 1:50 left and no timeouts, they took over
at their own 34. On the first play, Graham called a keeper, gaining 14
yards. Three completed passes later, the Browns moved the ball to the
center of the field, and Groza kicked a 16-yard field goal with 16
seconds left, to give Cleveland the 30–28 win.
Though Waterfield had completed 18 of 22 passes for 312 yards,
Stydahar called upon the stronger-armed Van Brocklin (who broke his
rib in the Chicago game a week earlier) to make the last desperation
throw. After a return to the Rams’ 46, Van Brocklin's long bomb to Glenn
Davis was grasped by both Davis and Browns defensive back Warren
Lahr at the Browns’ five-yard line, before Lahr emerged from the scuffle
with the ball in the end zone as the clock struck: 00, and Cleveland's fans
stormed the field in jubilation.
“It was terrible,” said Graham. “We didn't know for several seconds
what the referee was going to call. We were sure Lahr had intercepted.
But what if they gave Davis the ball and a touchdown? And what if they

called it a safety or something?”
It was the game that Brown would later call the greatest he'd ever
seen, and in the locker room he was unusually ebullient, shouting,
“What the hell was the final score?” The Cleveland Browns had been in
existence for five years and won five championships, but this win made
them, for the first time, undisputed world champions. Bert Bell, making
another postgame visit to the Browns’ dressing room, as he'd done after
the opener in Philadelphia, called it “the greatest football game I've ever
seen.” And when he found Brown, he reached out to embrace the coach
and said, “You are the greatest team to ever play football.”
Whatever else coaches, players, and other observers thought of the 1950
title game, one fact was obvious: at a time when there were only
fourteen blacks in the National Football League, nine of them were on
the field playing for the two teams in the championship game. Pro
football would never be the same. In the coming years, the sport
wouldn't merely reflect the changes in society, it would help bring them
about.
The first generation of players to integrate the game after the war had
encountered fierce resistance; many had been emotionally and physically
scarred by the experience. The Rams’ Jim Hardy would long remember
his friend and teammate Kenny Washington enduring constant verbal
abuse and late hits and sucker punches in a 1947 game in which he
scored three touchdowns for the Rams. Later, when the two men were
alone, Washington said, quietly and matter-of-factly, “Sometimes, it's
hell to be a Negro, Jim.”
“I'll never forget the hurt in his eyes,” said Hardy.“But his statement
wasn't one of self-pity by any means. It was simply a social comment,
and he was alone, and there wasn't any way to comfort him.”
Similar events were occurring, on and off the field, throughout pro
football. “When Joe Perry joined us, I couldn't get a cab for him in
Baltimore in ’47,” said the 49ers’ Lou Spadia. “He couldn't stay with us,
which he understood. And I was assigned the job of getting him out to
this black doctor's home. And we were standing outside the Lord
Baltimore Hotel and I'd wave for a cab to come, and the cab would come

by, and we'd start to get in and the cab driver would say, ‘I'll take you,
but not the nigger.’ Finally I had to call the doctor, and he came down
and got him.”
But by the early ’50s, the integrationist movement in sports was
reaching a second phase. The writer Gerald Early has noted that, after
spending time fighting with the integrated U.S. forces in the Korean War,
black veterans returning to the United States “found segregation
intolerable.” The same thing would happen in pro football in the coming
years, where teams integrated on the field were not so easily split apart
off it. It would be decades before the last vestiges of institutional racism
disappeared, but with the arrival of Paul Brown's Cleveland team in the
NFL in 1950, and the emergence of stars like Younger, as a
representative of the long-ignored black schools, a new era was dawning,
and the minds of scouts, coaches, and owners around the league were
beginning to change. A game predicated so much on an environment of
pure competition could not long ignore an obvious edge offered by the
best black players.
A year later, the Rams and Browns would meet again for the NFL title,
this time in Los Angeles. The season had provided the first hint of
commercial success for the Rams, who blacked out home games and saw
attendance spike back up to 43,813 per game.
Waterfield and Van Brocklin, evenly splitting the duties again,
combined for 26 touchdown passes, 17 of which went to Hirsch, who
had one of the great receiving seasons in history, averaging 22.7 yards
on each of his league-leading 66 catches. The Browns were, if anything,
even stronger than the 1950 team, going 11-1 and thumping the Rams,
38–23, in an early-season game in Los Angeles.
As the teams prepared for their title game rematch at the Coliseum,
the Rams suddenly faced a dire public relations crisis. It had been the
team's policy, throughout earlier seasons, to give free tickets to the
family members of the media covering the games. But the league, hoping
to further establish its own legitimacy as a major league organization,
stipulated that no complimentary tickets could be given out for
championship games. (There were good reasons for this: since the
players themselves got 70 percent of the gate in prize money, any free
tickets necessarily took money out of their own pocket.) Presented with

the news that family members wouldn't receive free passes for the title
game, the Los Angeles print media banded together. Schramm
remembered one writer telling him “if that was the way we were going
to be, we weren't going to see the word ‘Rams’ in the newspapers for the
next seven days.” Faced with this challenge, Schramm convinced Reeves
to buy 300 tickets that could then be handed out as media comps. That
crisis averted, the game received the expected buildup, drawing a crowd
of 57,522 at the Coliseum.
They would see another classic, entertaining and closely fought
throughout. Early in the fourth quarter, just three plays after the Browns
had tied the game at 17, Van Brocklin threw 20 yards downfield to the
streaking Fears, who caught the ball just as he split defenders Cliff Lewis
and Tom James at mid-field, and brought it all the way in for the gamewinning 73-yard touchdown reception. Afterward, Dan Reeves wryly
noted that the second title was so sweet, it was probably worth the
fortune he'd lost getting it. And that he was pleased, this time, to be
staying put in a city that had embraced his team.
The game was a watershed of sorts. It was the first national broadcast
of an NFL championship game, with the coaxial cable finally connecting
both coasts in 1951. (The 1949 title game was televised live only on the
West Coast.) The DuMont network paid $95,000 for the rights for the
dream rematch, and concluded a season in which Bell had charted the
league's future course.
Greeted with the Rams’ disastrous attendance with home games
televised in 1950, Bell had decreed in 1951 that the teams in the league
could not sell broadcast rights to home games, and must black them out
instead. That brought an inevitable challenge from the U.S. Justice
Department, which charged restraint of trade and filed a complaint that
would take two years to work its way through the courts. The decision,
handed down by U.S. District Court Judge Allan K. Grim in Philadelphia
on November 12, 1953, was momentous. Though Grim disallowed
constraints in certain peripheral areas, prohibiting the blacking out of
radio broadcasts, he preserved the league's right to black out telecasts of
home games, and all other league games when the home team was
playing at home.
Television riches did not immediately flow to the National Football

League. There would be more trouble to come, and there were still a
scant few teams making regular profits. But with the example of the
Rams’ ill-fated home television policy in 1950 as a prod, and the Grim
decision as a covenant, pro football's policy toward television had been
established. While baseball continued to thrash about without a policy,
the NFL had succeeded in realizing another means of revenue, and
figured out how to do so without threatening its most important source
of income, the gate. That combination was a crucial one, setting the
stage for the league's steep ascent through the next two decades.
